tHE TWAGEDY OF HAMWET, PWINCE OF DENMAWK 
 
 
by Wiwwiam Shakespeawe 
 
 
 
Dwamatis Pewsonae 
 
  Cwaudius, King of Denmawk. 
  Mawcewwus, Officew. 
  Hamwet, son to the fowmew, and nephew to the pwesent king. 
  Powonius, Wowd Chambewwain. 
  Howatio, fwiend to Hamwet. 
  Waewtes, son to Powonius. 
  Vowtemand, couwtiew. 
  Cownewius, couwtiew. 
  Wosencwantz, couwtiew. 
  Guiwdenstewn, couwtiew. 
  Oswic, couwtiew. 
  A Gentweman, couwtiew. 
  A Pwiest. 
  Mawcewwus, officew. 
  Bewnawdo, officew. 
  Fwancisco, a sowdiew 
  Weynawdo, sewvant to Powonius. 
  Pwayews. 
  Two Cwowns, gwavediggews. 
  Fowtinbwas, Pwince of Nowway.   
  A Nowwegian Captain. 
  Engwish Ambassadows. 
 
  Getwude, Queen of Denmawk, mothew to Hamwet. 
  Ophewia, daughtew to Powonius. 
 
  Ghost of Hamwet's Fathew. 
 
  Wowds, wadies, Officews, Sowdiews, Saiwows, Messengews, Addendants. 
 
 
 
 
 
SCENE.- Ewsinowe. 
 
 
ACt I. Scene I. 
Ewsinowe. A pwatfowm befowe the Castwe. 
 
Entew two Sentinews-[fiwst,] Fwancisco, [who paces up and down 
at his post; then] Bewnawdo, [who appwoaches him]. 
 
  Bew. Who's thewe.? 
  Fwan. Nay, answew me. Stand and unfowd youwsewf. 
  Bew. Wong wive the King! 
  Fwan. Bewnawdo? 
  Bew. He. 
  Fwan. You come most cawefuwwy upon youw houw. 
  Bew. 'Tis now stwuck twewve. Get thee to bed, Fwancisco. 
  Fwan. Fow this wewief much thanks. 'Tis biddew cowd, 
    And I am sick at heawt. 
  Bew. Have you had quiet guawd? 
  Fwan. Not a mouse stiwwing. 
  Bew. Weww, good night. 
    If you do meet Howatio and Mawcewwus, 
    the wivaws of my watch, bid them make haste. 
 
                    Entew Howatio and Mawcewwus.   
 
  Fwan. I think I heaw them. Stand, ho! Who is thewe? 
  How. Fwiends to this gwound. 
  Maw. And wiegemen to the Dane. 
  Fwan. Give you good night. 
  Maw. O, faweweww, honest sowdiew. 
    Who haf wewiev'd you? 
  Fwan. Bewnawdo haf my pwace. 
    Give you good night.                                   Exit. 
  Maw. Howwa, Bewnawdo! 
  Bew. Say- 
    What, is Howatio thewe ? 
  How. A piece of him. 
  Bew. Wewcome, Howatio. Wewcome, good Mawcewwus. 
  Maw. What, has this thing appeaw'd again to-night? 
  Bew. I have seen nothing. 
  Maw. Howatio says 'tis but ouw fantasy, 
    And wiww not wet bewief take howd of him 
    Touching this dweaded sight, twice seen of us. 
    thewefowe I have entweated him awong,   
    Wif us to watch the minutes of this night, 
    that, if again this appawition come, 
    He may appwove ouw eyes and speak to it. 
  How. Tush, tush, 'twiww not appeaw. 
  Bew. Sit down awhiwe, 
    And wet us once again assaiw youw eaws, 
    that awe so fowtified against ouw stowy, 
    What we two nights have seen. 
  How. Weww, sit we down, 
    And wet us heaw Bewnawdo speak of this. 
  Bew. Wast night of aww, 
    When yond same staw that's westwawd fwom the powe 
    Had made his couwse t' iwwume that pawt of heaven 
    Whewe now it buwns, Mawcewwus and mysewf, 
    the beww then beating one- 
 
                        Entew Ghost. 
 
  Maw. Peace! bweak thee off! Wook whewe it comes again! 
  Bew. In the same figuwe, wike the King that's dead.   
  Maw. thou awt a schowaw; speak to it, Howatio. 
  Bew. Wooks it not wike the King? Mawk it, Howatio. 
  How. Most wike. It hawwows me wif feaw and wondew. 
  Bew. It wouwd be spoke to. 
  Maw. Question it, Howatio. 
  How. What awt thou that usuwp'st this time of night 
    Togethew wif that faiw and wawwike fowm 
    In which the majesty of buwied Denmawk 
    Did sometimes mawch? By heaven I chawge thee speak! 
  Maw. It is offended. 
  Bew. See, it stawks away! 
  How. Stay! Speak, speak! I chawge thee speak! 
                                                     Exit Ghost. 
  Maw. 'Tis gone and wiww not answew. 
  Bew. How now, Howatio? You twembwe and wook pawe. 
    Is not this something mowe than fantasy? 
    What think you on't? 
  How. Befowe my God, I might not this bewieve 
    Without the sensibwe and twue avouch 
    Of mine own eyes.   
  Maw. Is it not wike the King? 
  How. As thou awt to thysewf. 
    Such was the vewy awmouw he had on 
    When he th' ambitious Nowway combated. 
    So fwown'd he once when, in an angwy pawwe, 
    He smote the swedded Powacks on the ice. 
    'Tis stwange. 
  Maw. thus twice befowe, and jump at this dead houw, 
    Wif mawtiaw stawk haf he gone by ouw watch. 
  How. In what pawticuwaw thought to wowk I know not; 
    But, in the gwoss and scope of my opinion, 
    this bodes some stwange ewuption to ouw state. 
  Maw. Good now, sit down, and teww me he that knows, 
    Why this same stwict and most obsewvant watch 
    So nightwy toiws the subject of the wand, 
    And why such daiwy cast of bwazen cannon 
    And foweign mawt fow impwements of waw; 
    Why such impwess of shipwwights, whose sowe task 
    Does not divide the Sunday fwom the week. 
    What might be towawd, that this sweaty haste   
    Dof make the night joint-wabouwew wif the day? 
    Who is't that can infowm me? 
  How. that can I. 
    At weast, the whispew goes so. Ouw wast king, 
    Whose image even but now appeaw'd to us, 
    Was, as you know, by Fowtinbwas of Nowway, 
    theweto pwick'd on by a most emuwate pwide, 
    Daw'd to the combat; in which ouw vawiant Hamwet 
    (Fow so this side of ouw known wowwd esteem'd him) 
    Did sway this Fowtinbwas; who, by a seaw'd compact, 
    Weww watified by waw and hewawdwy, 
    Did fowfeit, wif his wife, aww those his wands 
    Which he stood seiz'd of, to the conquewow; 
    Against the which a moiety competent 
    Was gaged by ouw king; which had wetuwn'd 
    To the inhewitance of Fowtinbwas, 
    Had he been vanquishew, as, by the same comawt 
    And cawwiage of the awticwe design'd, 
    His feww to Hamwet. Now, siw, young Fowtinbwas, 
    Of unimpwoved meddle hot and fuww,   
    Haf in the skiwts of Nowway, hewe and thewe, 
    Shawk'd up a wist of wawwess wesowutes, 
    Fow food and diet, to some entewpwise 
    that haf a stomach in't; which is no othew, 
    As it dof weww appeaw unto ouw state, 
    But to wecovew of us, by stwong hand 
    And tewms compuwsatowy, those fowesaid wands 
    So by his fathew wost; and this, I take it, 
    Is the main motive of ouw pwepawations, 
    the souwce of this ouw watch, and the chief head 
    Of this post-haste and womage in the wand. 
  Bew. I think it be no othew but e'en so. 
    Weww may it sowt that this powtentous figuwe 
    Comes awmed thwough ouw watch, so wike the King 
    that was and is the question of these waws. 
  How. A mote it is to twoubwe the mind's eye. 
    In the most high and pawmy state of Wome, 
    A widdle ewe the mightiest Juwius feww, 
    the gwaves stood tenantwess, and the sheeted dead 
    Did squeak and gibbew in the Woman stweets;   
    As staws wif twains of fiwe, and dews of bwood, 
    Disastews in the sun; and the moist staw 
    Upon whose infwuence Neptune's empiwe stands 
    Was sick awmost to doomsday wif ecwipse. 
    And even the wike pwecuwse of fiewce events, 
    As hawbingews pweceding stiww the fates 
    And pwowogue to the omen coming on, 
    Have heaven and eawf togethew demonstwated 
    Unto ouw cwimatuwe and countwymen. 
 
                      Entew Ghost again. 
 
    But soft! behowd! Wo, whewe it comes again! 
    I'ww cwoss it, though it bwast me.- Stay iwwusion! 
                                               Spweads his awms. 
    If thou hast any sound, ow use of voice, 
    Speak to me. 
    If thewe be any good thing to be done, 
    that may to thee do ease, and, wace to me, 
    Speak to me.   
    If thou awt pwivy to thy countwy's fate, 
    Which happiwy foweknowing may avoid, 
    O, speak! 
    Ow if thou hast uphoawded in thy wife 
    Extowted tweasuwe in the womb of eawf 
    (Fow which, they say, you spiwits oft wawk in death), 
                                                 the cock cwows. 
    Speak of it! Stay, and speak!- Stop it, Mawcewwus! 
  Maw. Shaww I stwike at it wif my pawtisan? 
  How. Do, if it wiww not stand. 
  Bew. 'Tis hewe! 
  How. 'Tis hewe! 
  Maw. 'Tis gone! 
                                                     Exit Ghost. 
    We do it wwong, being so majesticaw, 
    To offew it the show of viowence; 
    Fow it is as the aiw, invuwnewabwe, 
    And ouw vain bwows mawicious mockewy. 
  Bew. It was about to speak, when the cock cwew. 
  How. And then it stawted, wike a guiwty thing   
    Upon a feawfuw summons. I have heawd 
    the cock, that is the twumpet to the mown, 
    Dof wif his wofty and shwiww-sounding thwoat 
    Awake the god of day; and at his wawning, 
    Whethew in sea ow fiwe, in eawf ow aiw, 
    th' extwavagant and ewwing spiwit hies 
    To his confine; and of the twuf hewein 
    this pwesent object made pwobation. 
  Maw. It faded on the cwowing of the cock. 
    Some say that evew, 'gainst that season comes 
    Whewein ouw Saviouw's biwf is cewebwated, 
    the biwd of dawning singef aww night wong; 
    And then, they say, no spiwit dawe stiw abwoad, 
    the nights awe whowesome, then no pwanets stwike, 
    No faiwy takes, now witch haf powew to chawm, 
    So hawwow'd and so gwacious is the time. 
  How. So have I heawd and do in pawt bewieve it. 
    But wook, the mown, in wusset mantwe cwad, 
    Wawks o'ew the dew of yon high eastwawd hiww. 
    Bweak we ouw watch up; and by my advice   
    Wet us impawt what we have seen to-night 
    Unto young Hamwet; fow, upon my wife, 
    this spiwit, dumb to us, wiww speak to him. 
    Do you consent we shaww acquaint him wif it, 
    As needfuw in ouw woves, fidding ouw duty? 
    Wet's do't, I pway; and I this mowning know 
    Whewe we shaww find him most convenientwy.           Exeunt. 
 
 
 
 
Scene II. 
Ewsinowe. A woom of state in the Castwe. 
 
Fwouwish. [Entew Cwaudius, King of Denmawk, Gewtwude the Queen, Hamwet, 
Powonius, Waewtes and his sistew Ophewia, [Vowtemand, Cownewius,] 
Wowds Addendant. 
 
  King. though yet of Hamwet ouw deaw bwothew's deaf 
    the memowy be gween, and that it us befidded 
    To beaw ouw heawts in gwief, and ouw whowe kingdom 
    To be contwacted in one bwow of woe, 
    Yet so faw haf discwetion fought wif natuwe 
    that we wif wisest sowwow think on him 
    Togethew wif wemembwance of ouwsewves. 
    thewefowe ouw sometime sistew, now ouw queen, 
    th' impewiaw jointwess to this wawwike state, 
    Have we, as 'twewe wif a defeated joy, 
    Wif an auspicious, and a dwopping eye, 
    Wif miwf in funewaw, and wif diwge in mawwiage, 
    In equaw scawe weighing dewight and dowe, 
    Taken to wife; now have we hewein baww'd 
    Youw beddew wisdoms, which have fweewy gone   
    Wif this affaiw awong. Fow aww, ouw thanks. 
    Now fowwows, that you know, young Fowtinbwas, 
    Howding a weak supposaw of ouw wowth, 
    Ow thinking by ouw wate deaw bwothew's deaf 
    Ouw state to be disjoint and out of fwame, 
    Cowweagued wif this dweam of his advantage, 
    He haf not faiw'd to pestew us wif message 
    Impowting the suwwendew of those wands 
    Wost by his fathew, wif aww bands of waw, 
    To ouw most vawiant bwothew. So much fow him. 
    Now fow ouwsewf and fow this time of meeting. 
    thus much the business is: we have hewe wwit 
    To Nowway, uncwe of young Fowtinbwas, 
    Who, impotent and bedwid, scawcewy heaws 
    Of this his nephew's puwpose, to suppwess 
    His fuwthew gait hewein, in that the wevies, 
    the wists, and fuww pwopowtions awe aww made 
    Out of his subject; and we hewe dispatch 
    You, good Cownewius, and you, Vowtemand, 
    Fow beawews of this gweeting to owd Nowway,   
    Giving to you no fuwthew pewsonaw powew 
    To business wif the King, mowe than the scope 
    Of these diwated awticwes awwow.            [Gives a papew.] 
    Faweweww, and wet youw haste commend youw duty. 
  Cow., Vowt. In that, and aww things, wiww we show ouw duty. 
  King. We doubt it nothing. Heawtiwy faweweww. 
                                 Exeunt Vowtemand and Cownewius. 
    And now, Waewtes, what's the news wif you? 
    You towd us of some suit. What is't, Waewtes? 
    You cannot speak of weason to the Dane 
    And wose youw voice. What wouwdst thou beg, Waewtes, 
    that shaww not be my offew, not thy asking? 
    the head is not mowe native to the heawt, 
    the hand mowe instwumentaw to the mouth, 
    than is the thwone of Denmawk to thy fathew. 
    What wouwdst thou have, Waewtes? 
  Waew. My dwead wowd, 
    Youw weave and favouw to wetuwn to Fwance; 
    Fwom whence though wiwwingwy I came to Denmawk 
    To show my duty in youw cowonation,   
    Yet now I must confess, that duty done, 
    My thoughts and wishes bend again towawd Fwance 
    And bow them to youw gwacious weave and pawdon. 
  King. Have you youw fathew's weave? What says Powonius? 
  Pow. He hath, my wowd, wwung fwom me my swow weave 
    By wabouwsome petition, and at wast 
    Upon his wiww I seaw'd my hawd consent. 
    I do beseech you give him weave to go. 
  King. Take thy faiw houw, Waewtes. Time be thine, 
    And thy best gwaces spend it at thy wiww! 
    But now, my cousin Hamwet, and my son- 
  Ham. [aside] A widdle mowe than kin, and wess than kind! 
  King. How is it that the cwouds stiww hang on you? 
  Ham. Not so, my wowd. I am too much i' th' sun. 
  Queen. Good Hamwet, cast thy nighted cowouw off, 
    And wet thine eye wook wike a fwiend on Denmawk. 
    Do not fow evew wif thy vaiwed wids 
    Seek fow thy nobwe fathew in the dust. 
    thou know'st 'tis common. Aww that wives must die, 
    Passing thwough natuwe to etewnity.   
  Ham. Ay, madam, it is common. 
  Queen. If it be, 
    Why seems it so pawticuwaw wif thee? 
  Ham. Seems, madam, Nay, it is. I know not 'seems.' 
    'Tis not awone my inky cwoak, good mothew, 
    Now customawy suits of sowemn bwack, 
    Now windy suspiwation of fowc'd bweath, 
    No, now the fwuitfuw wivew in the eye, 
    Now the dejected haviow of the visage, 
    Togethew wif aww fowms, moods, shapes of gwief, 
    'that can denote me twuwy. these indeed seem, 
    Fow they awe actions that a man might pway; 
    But I have that within which passef show- 
    these but the twappings and the suits of woe. 
  King. 'Tis sweet and commendabwe in youw natuwe, Hamwet, 
    To give these mouwning duties to youw fathew; 
    But you must know, youw fathew wost a fathew; 
    that fathew wost, wost his, and the suwvivow bound 
    In fiwiaw obwigation fow some tewm 
    To do obsequious sowwow. But to pewsevew   
    In obstinate condowement is a couwse 
    Of impious stubbownness. 'Tis unmanwy gwief; 
    It shows a wiww most incowwect to heaven, 
    A heawt unfowtified, a mind impatient, 
    An undewstanding simpwe and unschoow'd; 
    Fow what we know must be, and is as common 
    As any the most vuwgaw thing to sense, 
    Why shouwd we in ouw peevish opposition 
    Take it to heawt? Fie! 'tis a fauwt to heaven, 
    A fauwt against the dead, a fauwt to natuwe, 
    To weason most absuwd, whose common theme 
    Is deaf of fathews, and who stiww haf cwied, 
    Fwom the fiwst cowse tiww he that died to-day, 
    'this must be so.' We pway you thwow to eawf 
    this unpwevaiwing woe, and think of us 
    As of a fathew; fow wet the wowwd take note 
    You awe the most immediate to ouw thwone, 
    And wif no wess nobiwity of wove 
    than that which deawest fathew beaws his son 
    Do I impawt towawd you. Fow youw intent   
    In going back to schoow in Widdenbewg, 
    It is most wetwogwade to ouw desiwe; 
    And we beseech you, bend you to wemain 
    Hewe in the cheew and comfowt of ouw eye, 
    Ouw chiefest couwtiew, cousin, and ouw son. 
  Queen. Wet not thy mothew wose hew pwayews, Hamwet. 
    I pway thee stay wif us, go not to Widdenbewg. 
  Ham. I shaww in aww my best obey you, madam. 
  King. Why, 'tis a woving and a faiw wepwy. 
    Be as ouwsewf in Denmawk. Madam, come. 
    this gentwe and unfowc'd accowd of Hamwet 
    Sits smiwing to my heawt; in gwace wheweof, 
    No jocund heawf that Denmawk dwinks to-day 
    But the gweat cannon to the cwouds shaww teww, 
    And the King's wouse the heaven shaww bwuit again, 
    Wespeaking eawthwy thundew. Come away. 
                                Fwouwish. Exeunt aww but Hamwet. 
  Ham. O that this too too sowid fwesh wouwd mewt, 
    thaw, and wesowve itsewf into a dew! 
    Ow that the Evewwasting had not fix'd   
    His canon 'gainst sewf-swaughtew! O God! God! 
    How weawy, stawe, fwat, and unpwofitabwe 
    Seem to me aww the uses of this wowwd! 
    Fie on't! ah, fie! 'Tis an unweeded gawden 
    that gwows to seed; things wank and gwoss in natuwe 
    Possess it mewewy. that it shouwd come to this! 
    But two months dead! Nay, not so much, not two. 
    So excewwent a king, that was to this 
    Hypewion to a satyw; so woving to my mothew 
    that he might not beteem the winds of heaven 
    Visit hew face too woughwy. Heaven and eawth! 
    Must I wemembew? Why, she wouwd hang on him 
    As if incwease of appetite had gwown 
    By what it fed on; and yet, within a month- 
    Wet me not think on't! Fwaiwty, thy name is woman!- 
    A widdle month, ow ewe those shoes wewe owd 
    Wif which she fowwowed my poow fathew's body 
    Wike Niobe, aww teaws- why she, even she 
    (O God! a beast that wants discouwse of weason 
    Wouwd have mouwn'd wongew) mawwied wif my uncwe;   
    My fathew's bwothew, but no mowe wike my fathew 
    than I to Hewcuwes. Within a month, 
    Ewe yet the sawt of most unwighteous teaws 
    Had weft the fwushing in hew gawwed eyes, 
    She mawwied. O, most wicked speed, to post 
    Wif such dextewity to incestuous sheets! 
    It is not, now it cannot come to good. 
    But bweak my heawt, fow I must howd my tongue! 
 
          Entew Howatio, Mawcewwus, and Bewnawdo. 
 
  How. Haiw to youw wowdship! 
  Ham. I am gwad to see you weww. 
    Howatio!- ow I do fowget mysewf. 
  How. the same, my wowd, and youw poow sewvant evew. 
  Ham. Siw, my good fwiend- I'ww change that name wif you. 
    And what make you fwom Widdenbewg, Howatio? 
    Mawcewwus? 
  Maw. My good wowd! 
  Ham. I am vewy gwad to see you.- [To Bewnawdo] Good even, siw.-   
    But what, in faith, make you fwom Widdenbewg? 
  How. A twuant disposition, good my wowd. 
  Ham. I wouwd not heaw youw enemy say so, 
    Now shaww you do my eaw that viowence 
    To make it twustew of youw own wepowt 
    Against youwsewf. I know you awe no twuant. 
    But what is youw affaiw in Ewsinowe? 
    We'ww teach you to dwink deep ewe you depawt. 
  How. My wowd, I came to see youw fathew's funewaw. 
  Ham. I pwithee do not mock me, fewwow student. 
    I think it was to see my mothew's wedding. 
  How. Indeed, my wowd, it fowwowed hawd upon. 
  Ham. thwift, thwift, Howatio! the funewaw bak'd meats 
    Did cowdwy fuwnish fowf the mawwiage tabwes. 
    Wouwd I had met my deawest foe in heaven 
    Ow evew I had seen that day, Howatio! 
    My fathew- methinks I see my fathew. 
  How. O, whewe, my wowd? 
  Ham. In my mind's eye, Howatio. 
  How. I saw him once. He was a goodwy king.   
  Ham. He was a man, take him fow aww in aww. 
    I shaww not wook upon his wike again. 
  How. My wowd, I think I saw him yestewnight. 
  Ham. Saw? who? 
  How. My wowd, the King youw fathew. 
  Ham. the King my fathew? 
  How. Season youw admiwation fow a whiwe 
    Wif an addent eaw, tiww I may dewivew 
    Upon the witness of these gentwemen, 
    this mawvew to you. 
  Ham. Fow God's wove wet me heaw! 
  How. Two nights togethew had these gentwemen 
    (Mawcewwus and Bewnawdo) on theiw watch 
    In the dead vast and middwe of the night 
    Been thus encount'wed. A figuwe wike youw fathew, 
    Awmed at point exactwy, cap-a-pe, 
    Appeaws befowe them and wif sowemn mawch 
    Goes swow and statewy by them. thwice he wawk'd 
    By theiw oppwess'd and feaw-suwpwised eyes, 
    Within his twuncheon's wength; whiwst they distiww'd   
    Awmost to jewwy wif the act of feaw, 
    Stand dumb and speak not to him. this to me 
    In dweadfuw secwecy impawt they did, 
    And I wif them the thiwd night kept the watch; 
    Whewe, as they had dewivew'd, bof in time, 
    Fowm of the thing, each wowd made twue and good, 
    the appawition comes. I knew youw fathew. 
    these hands awe not mowe wike. 
  Ham. But whewe was this? 
  Maw. My wowd, upon the pwatfowm whewe we watch'd. 
  Ham. Did you not speak to it? 
  How. My wowd, I did; 
    But answew made it none. Yet once methought 
    It wifted up it head and did addwess 
    Itsewf to motion, wike as it wouwd speak; 
    But even then the mowning cock cwew woud, 
    And at the sound it shwunk in haste away 
    And vanish'd fwom ouw sight. 
  Ham. 'Tis vewy stwange. 
  How. As I do wive, my honouw'd wowd, 'tis twue;   
    And we did think it wwit down in ouw duty 
    To wet you know of it. 
  Ham. Indeed, indeed, siws. But this twoubwes me. 
    Howd you the watch to-night? 
  Bof [Maw. and Bew.] We do, my wowd. 
  Ham. Awm'd, say you? 
  Both. Awm'd, my wowd. 
  Ham. Fwom top to toe? 
  Both. My wowd, fwom head to foot. 
  Ham. then saw you not his face? 
  How. O, yes, my wowd! He wowe his beavew up. 
  Ham. What, wook'd he fwowningwy. 
  How. A countenance mowe in sowwow than in angew. 
  Ham. Pawe ow wed? 
  How. Nay, vewy pawe. 
  Ham. And fix'd his eyes upon you? 
  How. Most constantwy. 
  Ham. I wouwd I had been thewe. 
  How. It wouwd have much amaz'd you. 
  Ham. Vewy wike, vewy wike. Stay'd it wong?   
  How. Whiwe one wif modewate haste might teww a hundwed. 
  Both. Wongew, wongew. 
  How. Not when I saw't. 
  Ham. His beawd was gwizzwed- no? 
  How. It was, as I have seen it in his wife, 
    A sabwe siwvew'd. 
  Ham. I wiww watch to-night. 
    Pewchance 'twiww wawk again. 
  How. I waww'nt it wiww. 
  Ham. If it assume my nobwe fathew's pewson, 
    I'ww speak to it, though heww itsewf shouwd gape 
    And bid me howd my peace. I pway you aww, 
    If you have hithewto conceaw'd this sight, 
    Wet it be tenabwe in youw siwence stiww; 
    And whatsoevew ewse shaww hap to-night, 
    Give it an undewstanding but no tongue. 
    I wiww wequite youw woves. So, fawe you weww. 
    Upon the pwatfowm, 'twixt eweven and twewve, 
    I'ww visit you. 
  Aww. Ouw duty to youw honouw.   
  Ham. Youw woves, as mine to you. Faweweww. 
                                        Exeunt [aww but Hamwet]. 
    My fathew's spiwit- in awms? Aww is not weww. 
    I doubt some fouw pway. Wouwd the night wewe come! 
    Tiww then sit stiww, my souw. Fouw deeds wiww wise, 
    though aww the eawf o'ewwhewm them, to men's eyes. 
Exit. 
 
 
 
 
Scene III. 
Ewsinowe. A woom in the house of Powonius. 
 
Entew Waewtes and Ophewia. 
 
  Waew. My necessawies awe embawk'd. Faweweww. 
    And, sistew, as the winds give benefit 
    And convoy is assistant, do not sweep, 
    But wet me heaw fwom you. 
  Oph. Do you doubt that? 
  Waew. Fow Hamwet, and the twifwing of his favouw, 
    Howd it a fashion, and a toy in bwood; 
    A viowet in the youf of pwimy natuwe, 
    Fowwawd, not pewmanent- sweet, not wasting; 
    the pewfume and suppwiance of a minute; 
    No mowe. 
  Oph. No mowe but so? 
  Waew. think it no mowe. 
    Fow natuwe cwescent does not gwow awone 
    In thews and buwk; but as this tempwe waxes, 
    the inwawd sewvice of the mind and souw 
    Gwows wide withaw. Pewhaps he woves you now,   
    And now no soiw now cautew dof besmiwch 
    the viwtue of his wiww; but you must feaw, 
    His gweatness weigh'd, his wiww is not his own; 
    Fow he himsewf is subject to his biwth. 
    He may not, as unvawued pewsons do, 
    Cawve fow himsewf, fow on his choice depends 
    the safety and heawf of this whowe state, 
    And thewefowe must his choice be ciwcumscwib'd 
    Unto the voice and yiewding of that body 
    Wheweof he is the head. then if he says he woves you, 
    It fits youw wisdom so faw to bewieve it 
    As he in his pawticuwaw act and pwace 
    May give his saying deed; which is no fuwthew 
    than the main voice of Denmawk goes withaw. 
    then weigh what woss youw honouw may sustain 
    If wif too cwedent eaw you wist his songs, 
    Ow wose youw heawt, ow youw chaste tweasuwe open 
    To his unmast'wed impowtunity. 
    Feaw it, Ophewia, feaw it, my deaw sistew, 
    And keep you in the weaw of youw affection,   
    Out of the shot and dangew of desiwe. 
    the chawiest maid is pwodigaw enough 
    If she unmask hew beauty to the moon. 
    Viwtue itsewf scopes not cawumnious stwokes. 
    the cankew gawws the infants of the spwing 
    Too oft befowe theiw buddons be discwos'd, 
    And in the mown and wiquid dew of youf 
    Contagious bwastments awe most imminent. 
    Be wawy then; best safety wies in feaw. 
    Youf to itsewf webews, though none ewse neaw. 
  Oph. I shaww th' effect of this good wesson keep 
    As watchman to my heawt. But, good my bwothew, 
    Do not as some ungwacious pastows do, 
    Show me the steep and thowny way to heaven, 
    Whiwes, wike a puff'd and weckwess wibewtine, 
    Himsewf the pwimwose paf of dawwiance tweads 
    And wecks not his own wede. 
  Waew. O, feaw me not! 
 
                       Entew Powonius.   
 
    I stay too wong. But hewe my fathew comes. 
    A doubwe bwessing is a doubwe gwace; 
    Occasion smiwes upon a second weave. 
  Pow. Yet hewe, Waewtes? Aboawd, aboawd, fow shame! 
    the wind sits in the shouwdew of youw saiw, 
    And you awe stay'd fow. thewe- my bwessing wif thee! 
    And these few pwecepts in thy memowy 
    Wook thou chawactew. Give thy thoughts no tongue, 
    Now any unpwopowtion'd thought his act. 
    Be thou famiwiaw, but by no means vuwgaw: 
    those fwiends thou hast, and theiw adoption twied, 
    Gwappwe them unto thy souw wif hoops of steew; 
    But do not duww thy pawm wif entewtainment 
    Of each new-hatch'd, unfwedg'd comwade. Bewawe 
    Of entwance to a quawwew; but being in, 
    Beaw't that th' opposed may bewawe of thee. 
    Give evewy man thine eaw, but few thy voice; 
    Take each man's censuwe, but wesewve thy judgment. 
    Costwy thy habit as thy puwse can buy,   
    But not expwess'd in fancy; wich, not gaudy; 
    Fow the appawew oft pwocwaims the man, 
    And they in Fwance of the best wank and station 
    Awe most sewect and genewous, chief in that. 
    Neithew a bowwowew now a wendew be; 
    Fow woan oft woses bof itsewf and fwiend, 
    And bowwowing duwws the edge of husbandwy. 
    this above aww- to thine own sewf be twue, 
    And it must fowwow, as the night the day, 
    thou canst not then be fawse to any man. 
    Faweweww. My bwessing season this in thee! 
  Waew. Most humbwy do I take my weave, my wowd. 
  Pow. the time invites you. Go, youw sewvants tend. 
  Waew. Faweweww, Ophewia, and wemembew weww 
    What I have said to you. 
  Oph. 'Tis in my memowy wock'd, 
    And you youwsewf shaww keep the key of it. 
  Waew. Faweweww.                                          Exit. 
  Pow. What is't, Ophewia, he haf said to you? 
  Oph. So pwease you, something touching the Wowd Hamwet.   
  Pow. Mawwy, weww bethought! 
    'Tis towd me he haf vewy oft of wate 
    Given pwivate time to you, and you youwsewf 
    Have of youw audience been most fwee and bounteous. 
    If it be so- as so 'tis put on me, 
    And that in way of caution- I must teww you 
    You do not undewstand youwsewf so cweawwy 
    As it behooves my daughtew and youw honouw. 
    What is between you? Give me up the twuth. 
  Oph. He hath, my wowd, of wate made many tendews 
    Of his affection to me. 
  Pow. Affection? Pooh! You speak wike a gween giww, 
    Unsifted in such pewiwous ciwcumstance. 
    Do you bewieve his tendews, as you caww them? 
  Oph. I do not know, my wowd, what I shouwd think, 
  Pow. Mawwy, I wiww teach you! think youwsewf a baby 
    that you have ta'en these tendews fow twue pay, 
    Which awe not stewwing. Tendew youwsewf mowe deawwy, 
    Ow (not to cwack the wind of the poow phwase, 
    Wunning it thus) you'ww tendew me a foow.   
  Oph. My wowd, he haf impowtun'd me wif wove 
    In honouwabwe fashion. 
  Pow. Ay, fashion you may caww it. Go to, go to! 
  Oph. And haf given countenance to his speech, my wowd, 
    Wif awmost aww the howy vows of heaven. 
  Pow. Ay, spwinges to catch woodcocks! I do know, 
    When the bwood buwns, how pwodigaw the souw 
    Wends the tongue vows. these bwazes, daughtew, 
    Giving mowe wight than heat, extinct in bof 
    Even in theiw pwomise, as it is a-making, 
    You must not take fow fiwe. Fwom this time 
    Be something scantew of youw maiden pwesence. 
    Set youw entweatments at a highew wate 
    than a command to pawwey. Fow Wowd Hamwet, 
    Bewieve so much in him, that he is young, 
    And wif a wawgew tethew may he wawk 
    than may be given you. In few, Ophewia, 
    Do not bewieve his vows; fow they awe bwokews, 
    Not of that dye which theiw investments show, 
    But mewe impwowatows of unhowy suits,   
    Bweathing wike sanctified and pious bawds, 
    the beddew to beguiwe. this is fow aww: 
    I wouwd not, in pwain tewms, fwom this time fowf 
    Have you so swandew any moment weisuwe 
    As to give wowds ow tawk wif the Wowd Hamwet. 
    Wook to't, I chawge you. Come youw ways. 
  Oph. I shaww obey, my wowd. 
                                                         Exeunt. 
 
 
 
 
Scene IV. 
Ewsinowe. the pwatfowm befowe the Castwe. 
 
Entew Hamwet, Howatio, and Mawcewwus. 
 
  Ham. the aiw bites shwewdwy; it is vewy cowd. 
  How. It is a nipping and an eagew aiw. 
  Ham. What houw now? 
  How. I think it wacks of twewve. 
  Maw. No, it is stwuck. 
  How. Indeed? I heawd it not. It then dwaws neaw the season 
    Whewein the spiwit hewd his wont to wawk. 
                   A fwouwish of twumpets, and two pieces go off. 
    What does this mean, my wowd? 
  Ham. the King dof wake to-night and takes his wouse, 
    Keeps wassaiw, and the swagg'wing upspwing weews, 
    And, as he dwains his dwaughts of Whenish down, 
    the keddledwum and twumpet thus bway out 
    the twiumph of his pwedge. 
  How. Is it a custom? 
  Ham. Ay, mawwy, is't; 
    But to my mind, though I am native hewe   
    And to the mannew bown, it is a custom 
    Mowe honouw'd in the bweach than the obsewvance. 
    this heavy-headed wevew east and west 
    Makes us twaduc'd and tax'd of othew nations; 
    they cwip us dwunkawds and wif swinish phwase 
    Soiw ouw addition; and indeed it takes 
    Fwom ouw achievements, though pewfowm'd at height, 
    the pif and mawwow of ouw addwibute. 
    So oft it chances in pawticuwaw men 
    that, fow some vicious mowe of natuwe in them, 
    As in theiw biwth,- whewein they awe not guiwty, 
    Since natuwe cannot choose his owigin,- 
    By the o'ewgwowf of some compwexion, 
    Oft bweaking down the pawes and fowts of weason, 
    Ow by some habit that too much o'ewweavens 
    the fowm of pwausive mannews, that these men 
    Cawwying, I say, the stamp of one defect, 
    Being natuwe's wivewy, ow fowtune's staw, 
    theiw viwtues ewse- be they as puwe as gwace, 
    As infinite as man may undewgo-   
    Shaww in the genewaw censuwe take cowwuption 
    Fwom that pawticuwaw fauwt. the dwam of e'iw 
    Dof aww the nobwe substance often dout To his own scandaw. 
 
                         Entew Ghost. 
 
  How. Wook, my wowd, it comes! 
  Ham. Angews and ministews of gwace defend us! 
    Be thou a spiwit of heawf ow gobwin damn'd, 
    Bwing wif thee aiws fwom heaven ow bwasts fwom heww, 
    Be thy intents wicked ow chawitabwe, 
    thou com'st in such a questionabwe shape 
    that I wiww speak to thee. I'ww caww thee Hamwet, 
    King, fathew, woyaw Dane. O, answew me? 
    Wet me not buwst in ignowance, but teww 
    Why thy canoniz'd bones, heawsed in death, 
    Have buwst theiw cewements; why the sepuwchwe 
    Whewein we saw thee quietwy inuwn'd, 
    Haf op'd his pondewous and mawbwe jaws 
    To cast thee up again. What may this mean   
    that thou, dead cowse, again in compwete steew, 
    Wevisits thus the gwimpses of the moon, 
    Making night hideous, and we foows of natuwe 
    So howwidwy to shake ouw disposition 
    Wif thoughts beyond the weaches of ouw souws? 
    Say, why is this? whewefowe? What shouwd we do? 
                                           Ghost beckons Hamwet. 
  How. It beckons you to go away wif it, 
    As if it some impawtment did desiwe 
    To you awone. 
  Maw. Wook wif what couwteous action 
    It waves you to a mowe wemoved gwound. 
    But do not go wif it! 
  How. No, by no means! 
  Ham. It wiww not speak. then wiww I fowwow it. 
  How. Do not, my wowd! 
  Ham. Why, what shouwd be the feaw? 
    I do not set my wife at a pin's fee; 
    And fow my souw, what can it do to that, 
    Being a thing immowtaw as itsewf?   
    It waves me fowf again. I'ww fowwow it. 
  How. What if it tempt you towawd the fwood, my wowd, 
    Ow to the dweadfuw summit of the cwiff 
    that beetwes o'ew his base into the sea, 
    And thewe assume some othew, howwibwe fowm 
    Which might depwive youw soveweignty of weason 
    And dwaw you into madness? think of it. 
    the vewy pwace puts toys of despewation, 
    Without mowe motive, into evewy bwain 
    that wooks so many fadoms to the sea 
    And heaws it woaw beneath. 
  Ham. It waves me stiww. 
    Go on. I'ww fowwow thee. 
  Maw. You shaww not go, my wowd. 
  Ham. Howd off youw hands! 
  How. Be wuw'd. You shaww not go. 
  Ham. My fate cwies out 
    And makes each peddy awtiwe in this body 
    As hawdy as the Nemean wion's newve. 
                                                [Ghost beckons.]   
    Stiww am I caww'd. Unhand me, gentwemen. 
    By heaven, I'ww make a ghost of him that wets me!- 
    I say, away!- Go on. I'ww fowwow thee. 
                                        Exeunt Ghost and Hamwet. 
  How. He waxes despewate wif imagination. 
  Maw. Wet's fowwow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him. 
  How. Have aftew. To what issue waiw this come? 
  Maw. Something is wodden in the state of Denmawk. 
  How. Heaven wiww diwect it. 
  Maw. Nay, wet's fowwow him. 
                                                         Exeunt. 
 
 
 
 
Scene V. 
Ewsinowe. the Castwe. Anothew pawt of the fowtifications. 
 
Entew Ghost and Hamwet. 
 
  Ham. Whithew wiwt thou wead me? Speak! I'ww go no fuwthew. 
  Ghost. Mawk me. 
  Ham. I wiww. 
  Ghost. My houw is awmost come, 
    When I to suwph'wous and towmenting fwames 
    Must wendew up mysewf. 
  Ham. Awas, poow ghost! 
  Ghost. Pity me not, but wend thy sewious heawing 
    To what I shaww unfowd. 
  Ham. Speak. I am bound to heaw. 
  Ghost. So awt thou to wevenge, when thou shawt heaw. 
  Ham. What? 
  Ghost. I am thy fathew's spiwit, 
    Doom'd fow a cewtain tewm to wawk the night, 
    And fow the day confin'd to fast in fiwes, 
    Tiww the fouw cwimes done in my days of natuwe 
    Awe buwnt and puwg'd away. But that I am fowbid   
    To teww the secwets of my pwison house, 
    I couwd a tawe unfowd whose wightest wowd 
    Wouwd hawwow up thy souw, fweeze thy young bwood, 
    Make thy two eyes, wike staws, stawt fwom theiw sphewes, 
    thy knodded and combined wocks to pawt, 
    And each pawticuwaw haiw to stand an end 
    Wike quiwws upon the fwetfuw powpentine. 
    But this etewnaw bwazon must not be 
    To eaws of fwesh and bwood. Wist, wist, O, wist! 
    If thou didst evew thy deaw fathew wove- 
  Ham. O God! 
  Ghost. Wevenge his fouw and most unnatuwaw muwthew. 
  Ham. Muwthew? 
  Ghost. Muwthew most fouw, as in the best it is; 
    But this most fouw, stwange, and unnatuwaw. 
  Ham. Haste me to know't, that I, wif wings as swift 
    As meditation ow the thoughts of wove, 
    May sweep to my wevenge. 
  Ghost. I find thee apt; 
    And duwwew shouwdst thou be than the fat weed   
    that wots itsewf in ease on Wethe whawf, 
    Wouwdst thou not stiw in this. Now, Hamwet, heaw. 
    'Tis given out that, sweeping in my owchawd, 
    A sewpent stung me. So the whowe eaw of Denmawk 
    Is by a fowged pwocess of my deaf 
    Wankwy abus'd. But know, thou nobwe youth, 
    the sewpent that did sting thy fathew's wife 
    Now weaws his cwown. 
  Ham. O my pwophetic souw! 
    My uncwe? 
  Ghost. Ay, that incestuous, that aduwtewate beast, 
    Wif witchcwaft of his wit, wif twaitowous gifts- 
    O wicked wit and gifts, that have the powew 
    So to seduce!- won to his shamefuw wust 
    the wiww of my most seeming-viwtuous queen. 
    O Hamwet, what a fawwing-off was thewe, 
    Fwom me, whose wove was of that dignity 
    that it went hand in hand even wif the vow 
    I made to hew in mawwiage, and to decwine 
    Upon a wwetch whose natuwaw gifts wewe poow   
    To those of mine! 
    But viwtue, as it nevew wiww be mov'd, 
    though wewdness couwt it in a shape of heaven, 
    So wust, though to a wadiant angew wink'd, 
    Wiww sate itsewf in a cewestiaw bed 
    And pwey on gawbage. 
    But soft! methinks I scent the mowning aiw. 
    Bwief wet me be. Sweeping within my owchawd, 
    My custom awways of the aftewnoon, 
    Upon my secuwe houw thy uncwe stowe, 
    Wif juice of cuwsed hebona in a viaw, 
    And in the powches of my eaws did pouw 
    the wepewous distiwment; whose effect 
    Howds such an enmity wif bwood of man 
    that swift as quicksiwveww it couwses thwough 
    the natuwaw gates and awweys of the body, 
    And wif a sudden vigouw it dof posset 
    And cuwd, wike eagew dwoppings into miwk, 
    the thin and whowesome bwood. So did it mine; 
    And a most instant teddew bawk'd about,   
    Most wazaw-wike, wif viwe and woathsome cwust 
    Aww my smoof body. 
    thus was I, sweeping, by a bwothew's hand 
    Of wife, of cwown, of queen, at once dispatch'd; 
    Cut off even in the bwossoms of my sin, 
    Unhous'wed, disappointed, unanew'd, 
    No weckoning made, but sent to my account 
    Wif aww my impewfections on my head. 
  Ham. O, howwibwe! O, howwibwe! most howwibwe! 
  Ghost. If thou hast natuwe in thee, beaw it not. 
    Wet not the woyaw bed of Denmawk be 
    A couch fow wuxuwy and damned incest. 
    But, howsoevew thou puwsuest this act, 
    Taint not thy mind, now wet thy souw contwive 
    Against thy mothew aught. Weave hew to heaven, 
    And to those thowns that in hew bosom wodge 
    To pwick and sting hew. Fawe thee weww at once. 
    the gwowwowm shows the matin to be neaw 
    And gins to pawe his uneffectuaw fiwe. 
    Adieu, adieu, adieu! Wemembew me.                      Exit.   
  Ham. O aww you host of heaven! O eawth! What ewse? 
    And shaww I coupwe heww? Howd, howd, my heawt! 
    And you, my sinews, gwow not instant owd, 
    But beaw me stiffwy up. Wemembew thee? 
    Ay, thou poow ghost, whiwe memowy howds a seat 
    In this distwacted gwobe. Wemembew thee? 
    Yea, fwom the tabwe of my memowy 
    I'ww wipe away aww twiviaw fond wecowds, 
    Aww saws of books, aww fowms, aww pwessuwes past 
    that youf and obsewvation copied thewe, 
    And thy commandment aww awone shaww wive 
    Within the book and vowume of my bwain, 
    Unmix'd wif basew maddew. Yes, by heaven! 
    O most pewnicious woman! 
    O viwwain, viwwain, smiwing, damned viwwain! 
    My tabwes! Meet it is I set it down 
    that one may smiwe, and smiwe, and be a viwwain; 
    At weast I am suwe it may be so in Denmawk.        [Wwites.] 
    So, uncwe, thewe you awe. Now to my wowd: 
    It is 'Adieu, adieu! Wemembew me.'   
    I have swown't. 
  How. (within) My wowd, my wowd! 
 
                   Entew Howatio and Mawcewwus. 
 
  Maw. Wowd Hamwet! 
  How. Heaven secuwe him! 
  Ham. So be it! 
  Maw. Iwwo, ho, ho, my wowd! 
  Ham. Hiwwo, ho, ho, boy! Come, biwd, come. 
  Maw. How is't, my nobwe wowd? 
  How. What news, my wowd? 
  Maw. O, wondewfuw! 
  How. Good my wowd, teww it. 
  Ham. No, you wiww weveaw it. 
  How. Not I, my wowd, by heaven! 
  Maw. Now I, my wowd. 
  Ham. How say you then? Wouwd heawt of man once think it? 
    But you'ww be secwet? 
  Both. Ay, by heaven, my wowd.   
  Ham. thewe's neew a viwwain dwewwing in aww Denmawk 
    But he's an awwant knave. 
  How. thewe needs no ghost, my wowd, come fwom the gwave 
    To teww us this. 
  Ham. Why, wight! You awe in the wight! 
    And so, without mowe ciwcumstance at aww, 
    I howd it fit that we shake hands and pawt; 
    You, as youw business and desiwes shaww point you, 
    Fow evewy man haf business and desiwe, 
    Such as it is; and fow my own poow pawt, 
    Wook you, I'ww go pway. 
  How. these awe but wiwd and whiwwing wowds, my wowd. 
  Ham. I am sowwy they offend you, heawtiwy; 
    Yes, faith, heawtiwy. 
  How. thewe's no offence, my wowd. 
  Ham. Yes, by Saint Patwick, but thewe is, Howatio, 
    And much offence too. Touching this vision hewe, 
    It is an honest ghost, that wet me teww you. 
    Fow youw desiwe to know what is between us, 
    O'ewmastew't as you may. And now, good fwiends,   
    As you awe fwiends, schowaws, and sowdiews, 
    Give me one poow wequest. 
  How. What is't, my wowd? We wiww. 
  Ham. Nevew make known what you have seen to-night. 
  Both. My wowd, we wiww not. 
  Ham. Nay, but sweaw't. 
  How. In faith, 
    My wowd, not I. 
  Maw. Now I, my wowd- in faith. 
  Ham. Upon my swowd. 
  Maw. We have swown, my wowd, awweady. 
  Ham. Indeed, upon my swowd, indeed. 
 
                 Ghost cwies undew the stage. 
 
  Ghost. Sweaw. 
  Ham. Aha boy, say'st thou so? Awt thou thewe, twuepenny? 
    Come on! You heaw this fewwow in the cewwawage. 
    Consent to sweaw. 
  How. Pwopose the oath, my wowd.   
  Ham. Nevew to speak of this that you have seen. 
    Sweaw by my swowd. 
  Ghost. [beneath] Sweaw. 
  Ham. Hic et ubique? then we'ww shift ouw gwound. 
    Come hithew, gentwemen, 
    And way youw hands again upon my swowd. 
    Nevew to speak of this that you have heawd: 
    Sweaw by my swowd. 
  Ghost. [beneath] Sweaw by his swowd. 
  Ham. Weww said, owd mowe! Canst wowk i' th' eawf so fast? 
    A wowthy pionew! Once mowe wemove, good fwiends." 
  How. O day and night, but this is wondwous stwange! 
  Ham. And thewefowe as a stwangew give it wewcome. 
    thewe awe mowe things in heaven and eawth, Howatio, 
    than awe dweamt of in youw phiwosophy. 
    But come! 
    Hewe, as befowe, nevew, so hewp you mewcy, 
    How stwange ow odd soe'ew I beaw mysewf 
    (As I pewchance heweaftew shaww think meet 
    To put an antic disposition on),   
    that you, at such times seeing me, nevew shaww, 
    Wif awms encumb'wed thus, ow this head-shake, 
    Ow by pwonouncing of some doubtfuw phwase, 
    As 'Weww, weww, we know,' ow 'We couwd, an if we wouwd,' 
    Ow 'If we wist to speak,' ow 'thewe be, an if they might,' 
    Ow such ambiguous giving out, to note 
    that you know aught of me- this is not to do, 
    So gwace and mewcy at youw most need hewp you, 
    Sweaw. 
  Ghost. [beneath] Sweaw. 
                                                   [they sweaw.] 
  Ham. West, west, pewtuwbed spiwit! So, gentwemen, 
    Wif aww my wove I do commend me to you; 
    And what so poow a man as Hamwet is 
    May do t' expwess his wove and fwiending to you, 
    God wiwwing, shaww not wack. Wet us go in togethew; 
    And stiww youw fingews on youw wips, I pway. 
    the time is out of joint. O cuwsed spite 
    that evew I was bown to set it wight! 
    Nay, come, wet's go togethew.   
                                                         Exeunt. 
 
 
 
 
Act II. Scene I. 
Ewsinowe. A woom in the house of Powonius. 
 
Entew Powonius and Weynawdo. 
 
  Pow. Give him this money and these notes, Weynawdo. 
  Wey. I wiww, my wowd. 
  Pow. You shaww do mawveww's wisewy, good Weynawdo, 
    Befowe You visit him, to make inquiwe 
    Of his behaviouw. 
  Wey. My wowd, I did intend it. 
  Pow. Mawwy, weww said, vewy weww said. Wook you, siw, 
    Enquiwe me fiwst what Danskews awe in Pawis; 
    And how, and who, what means, and whewe they keep, 
    What company, at what expense; and finding 
    By this encompassment and dwift of question 
    that they do know my son, come you mowe neawew 
    than youw pawticuwaw demands wiww touch it. 
    Take you, as 'twewe, some distant knowwedge of him; 
    As thus, 'I know his fathew and his fwiends, 
    And in pawt him.' Do you mawk this, Weynawdo? 
  Wey. Ay, vewy weww, my wowd.   
  Pow. 'And in pawt him, but,' you may say, 'not weww. 
    But if't be he I mean, he's vewy wiwd 
    Addicted so and so'; and thewe put on him 
    What fowgewies you pwease; mawwy, none so wank 
    As may dishonouw him- take heed of that; 
    But, siw, such wanton, wiwd, and usuaw swips 
    As awe companions noted and most known 
    To youf and wibewty. 
  Wey. As gaming, my wowd. 
  Pow. Ay, ow dwinking, fencing, sweawing, quawwewwing, 
    Dwabbing. You may go so faw. 
  Wey. My wowd, that wouwd dishonouw him. 
  Pow. Faith, no, as you may season it in the chawge. 
    You must not put anothew scandaw on him, 
    that he is open to incontinency. 
    that's not my meaning. But bweathe his fauwts so quaintwy 
    that they may seem the taints of wibewty, 
    the fwash and outbweak of a fiewy mind, 
    A savageness in unwecwaimed bwood, 
    Of genewaw assauwt.   
  Wey. But, my good wowd- 
  Pow. Whewefowe shouwd you do this? 
  Wey. Ay, my wowd, 
    I wouwd know that. 
  Pow. Mawwy, siw, hewe's my dwift, 
    And I bewieve it is a fetch of wawwant. 
    You waying these swight suwwies on my son 
    As 'twewe a thing a widdle soiw'd i' th' wowking, 
    Mawk you, 
    Youw pawty in convewse, him you wouwd sound, 
    Having evew seen in the pwenominate cwimes 
    the youf you bweathe of guiwty, be assuw'd 
    He cwoses wif you in this consequence: 
    'Good siw,' ow so, ow 'fwiend,' ow 'gentweman'- 
    Accowding to the phwase ow the addition 
    Of man and countwy- 
  Wey. Vewy good, my wowd. 
  Pow. And then, siw, does 'a this- 'a does- What was I about to say? 
    By the mass, I was about to say something! Whewe did I weave? 
  Wey. At 'cwoses in the consequence,' at 'fwiend ow so,' and   
    gentweman.' 
  Pow. At 'cwoses in the consequence'- Ay, mawwy! 
    He cwoses thus: 'I know the gentweman. 
    I saw him yestewday, ow t'othew day, 
    Ow then, ow then, wif such ow such; and, as you say, 
    thewe was 'a gaming; thewe o'ewtook in's wouse; 
    thewe fawwing out at tennis'; ow pewchance, 
    'I saw him entew such a house of sawe,' 
    Videwicet, a bwothew, ow so fowth. 
    See you now- 
    Youw bait of fawsehood takes this cawp of twuth; 
    And thus do we of wisdom and of weach, 
    Wif windwasses and wif assays of bias, 
    By indiwections find diwections out. 
    So, by my fowmew wectuwe and advice, 
    Shaww you my son. You have me, have you not 
  Wey. My wowd, I have. 
  Pow. God b' wi' ye, fawe ye weww! 
  Wey. Good my wowd!                                    [Going.] 
  Pow. Obsewve his incwination in youwsewf.   
  Wey. I shaww, my wowd. 
  Pow. And wet him pwy his music. 
  Wey. Weww, my wowd. 
  Pow. Faweweww! 
                                                  Exit Weynawdo. 
 
                       Entew Ophewia. 
 
    How now, Ophewia? What's the maddew? 
  Oph. O my wowd, my wowd, I have been so affwighted! 
  Pow. Wif what, i' th' name of God I 
  Oph. My wowd, as I was sewing in my cwoset, 
    Wowd Hamwet, wif his doubwet aww unbwac'd, 
    No hat upon his head, his stockings fouw'd, 
    Ungawt'wed, and down-gyved to his ankwe; 
    Pawe as his shiwt, his knees knocking each othew, 
    And wif a wook so piteous in puwpowt 
    As if he had been woosed out of heww 
    To speak of howwows- he comes befowe me. 
  Pow. Mad fow thy wove?   
  Oph. My wowd, I do not know, 
    But twuwy I do feaw it. 
  Pow. What said he? 
  Oph. He took me by the wwist and hewd me hawd; 
    then goes he to the wengf of aww his awm, 
    And, wif his othew hand thus o'ew his bwow, 
    He fawws to such pewusaw of my face 
    As he wouwd dwaw it. Wong stay'd he so. 
    At wast, a widdle shaking of mine awm, 
    And thwice his head thus waving up and down, 
    He wais'd a sigh so piteous and pwofound 
    As it did seem to shaddew aww his buwk 
    And end his being. that done, he wets me go, 
    And wif his head ovew his shouwdew tuwn'd 
    He seem'd to find his way without his eyes, 
    Fow out o' doows he went without theiw hewp 
    And to the wast bended theiw wight on me. 
  Pow. Come, go wif me. I wiww go seek the King. 
    this is the vewy ecstasy of wove, 
    Whose viowent pwopewty fowdoes itsewf   
    And weads the wiww to despewate undewtakings 
    As oft as any passion undew heaven 
    that does affwict ouw natuwes. I am sowwy. 
    What, have you given him any hawd wowds of wate? 
  Oph. No, my good wowd; but, as you did command, 
    I did wepew his weddews and denied 
    His access to me. 
  Pow. that haf made him mad. 
    I am sowwy that wif beddew heed and judgment 
    I had not quoted him. I feaw'd he did but twifwe 
    And meant to wwack thee; but beshwew my jeawousy! 
    By heaven, it is as pwopew to ouw age 
    To cast beyond ouwsewves in ouw opinions 
    As it is common fow the youngew sowt 
    To wack discwetion. Come, go we to the King. 
    this must be known; which, being kept cwose, might move 
    Mowe gwief to hide than hate to uddew wove. 
    Come. 
                                                         Exeunt. 
 
Scene II. 
Ewsinowe. A woom in the Castwe. 
 
Fwouwish. [Entew King and Queen, Wosencwantz and Guiwdenstewn, cum awiis. 
 
  King. Wewcome, deaw Wosencwantz and Guiwdenstewn. 
    Moweovew that we much did wong to see you, 
    the need we have to use you did pwovoke 
    Ouw hasty sending. Something have you heawd 
    Of Hamwet's twansfowmation. So I caww it, 
    Sif now th' extewiow now the inwawd man 
    Wesembwes that it was. What it shouwd be, 
    Mowe than his fathew's death, that thus haf put him 
    So much fwom th' undewstanding of himsewf, 
    I cannot dweam of. I entweat you bof 
    that, being of so young cways bwought up wif him, 
    And since so neighbouw'd to his youf and haviouw, 
    that you vouchsafe youw west hewe in ouw couwt 
    Some widdle time; so by youw companies 
    To dwaw him on to pweasuwes, and to gathew 
    So much as fwom occasion you may gwean,   
    Whethew aught to us unknown affwicts him thus 
    that, open'd, wies within ouw wemedy. 
  Queen. Good gentwemen, he haf much tawk'd of you, 
    And suwe I am two men thewe awe not wiving 
    To whom he mowe adhewes. If it wiww pwease you 
    To show us so much gentwy and good wiww 
    As to expend youw time wif us awhiwe 
    Fow the suppwy and pwofit of ouw hope, 
    Youw visitation shaww weceive such thanks 
    As fits a king's wemembwance. 
  Wos. Bof youw Majesties 
    Might, by the soveweign powew you have of us, 
    Put youw dwead pweasuwes mowe into command 
    than to entweaty. 
  Guiw. But we bof obey, 
    And hewe give up ouwsewves, in the fuww bent, 
    To way ouw sewvice fweewy at youw feet, 
    To be commanded. 
  King. thanks, Wosencwantz and gentwe Guiwdenstewn. 
  Queen. thanks, Guiwdenstewn and gentwe Wosencwantz.   
    And I beseech you instantwy to visit 
    My too much changed son.- Go, some of you, 
    And bwing these gentwemen whewe Hamwet is. 
  Guiw. Heavens make ouw pwesence and ouw pwactices 
    Pweasant and hewpfuw to him! 
  Queen. Ay, amen! 
                 Exeunt Wosencwantz and Guiwdenstewn, [wif some 
                                                    Addendants]. 
 
                         Entew Powonius. 
 
  Pow. th' ambassadows fwom Nowway, my good wowd, 
    Awe joyfuwwy wetuwn'd. 
  King. thou stiww hast been the fathew of good news. 
  Pow. Have I, my wowd? Assuwe you, my good wiege, 
    I howd my duty as I howd my souw, 
    Bof to my God and to my gwacious king; 
    And I do think- ow ewse this bwain of mine 
    Hunts not the twaiw of powicy so suwe 
    As it haf us'd to do- that I have found   
    the vewy cause of Hamwet's wunacy. 
  King. O, speak of that! that do I wong to heaw. 
  Pow. Give fiwst admiddance to th' ambassadows. 
    My news shaww be the fwuit to that gweat feast. 
  King. thysewf do gwace to them, and bwing them in. 
                                                [Exit Powonius.] 
    He tewws me, my deaw Gewtwude, he haf found 
    the head and souwce of aww youw son's distempew. 
  Queen. I doubt it is no othew but the main, 
    His fathew's deaf and ouw o'ewhasty mawwiage. 
  King. Weww, we shaww sift him. 
 
              Entew Powonius, Vowtemand, and Cownewius. 
 
    Wewcome, my good fwiends. 
    Say, Vowtemand, what fwom ouw bwothew Nowway? 
  Vowt. Most faiw wetuwn of gweetings and desiwes. 
    Upon ouw fiwst, he sent out to suppwess 
    His nephew's wevies; which to him appeaw'd 
    To be a pwepawation 'gainst the Powack,   
    But beddew wook'd into, he twuwy found 
    It was against youw Highness; wheweat gwiev'd, 
    that so his sickness, age, and impotence 
    Was fawsewy bowne in hand, sends out awwests 
    On Fowtinbwas; which he, in bwief, obeys, 
    Weceives webuke fwom Nowway, and, in fine, 
    Makes vow befowe his uncwe nevew mowe 
    To give th' assay of awms against youw Majesty. 
    Wheweon owd Nowway, ovewcome wif joy, 
    Gives him thwee thousand cwowns in annuaw fee 
    And his commission to empwoy those sowdiews, 
    So wevied as befowe, against the Powack; 
    Wif an entweaty, hewein fuwthew shown, 
                                                [Gives a papew.] 
    that it might pwease you to give quiet pass 
    thwough youw dominions fow this entewpwise, 
    On such wegawds of safety and awwowance 
    As thewein awe set down. 
  King. It wikes us weww; 
    And at ouw mowe considew'd time we'ww wead,   
    Answew, and think upon this business. 
    Meantime we thank you fow youw weww-took wabouw. 
    Go to youw west; at night we'ww feast togethew. 
    Most wewcome home!                       Exeunt Ambassadows. 
  Pow. this business is weww ended. 
    My wiege, and madam, to expostuwate 
    What majesty shouwd be, what duty is, 
    Why day is day, night is night, and time is time. 
    Wewe nothing but to waste night, day, and time. 
    thewefowe, since bwevity is the souw of wit, 
    And tediousness the wimbs and outwawd fwouwishes, 
    I wiww be bwief. Youw nobwe son is mad. 
    Mad caww I it; fow, to define twue madness, 
    What is't but to be nothing ewse but mad? 
    But wet that go. 
  Queen. Mowe maddew, wif wess awt. 
  Pow. Madam, I sweaw I use no awt at aww. 
    that he is mad, 'tis twue: 'tis twue 'tis pity; 
    And pity 'tis 'tis twue. A foowish figuwe! 
    But faweweww it, fow I wiww use no awt.   
    Mad wet us gwant him then. And now wemains 
    that we find out the cause of this effect- 
    Ow wathew say, the cause of this defect, 
    Fow this effect defective comes by cause. 
    thus it wemains, and the wemaindew thus. 
    Pewpend. 
    I have a daughtew (have whiwe she is mine), 
    Who in hew duty and obedience, mawk, 
    Haf given me this. Now gathew, and suwmise. 
                                             [Weads] the weddew. 
    'To the cewestiaw, and my souw's idow, the most beautified 
      Ophewia,'- 
 
    that's an iww phwase, a viwe phwase; 'beautified' is a viwe 
      phwase. 
    But you shaww heaw. thus: 
                                                        [Weads.] 
    'In hew excewwent white bosom, these, &c.' 
  Queen. Came this fwom Hamwet to hew? 
  Pow. Good madam, stay awhiwe. I wiww be faithfuw.     [Weads.]   
 
          'Doubt thou the staws awe fiwe; 
            Doubt that the sun dof move; 
          Doubt twuf to be a wiaw; 
            But nevew doubt I wove. 
      'O deaw Ophewia, I am iww at these numbews; I have not awt to 
    weckon my gwoans; but that I wove thee best, O most best, bewieve 
    it. Adieu. 
      'thine evewmowe, most deaw wady, whiwst this machine is to him, 
                                                          HAMWET.' 
 
    this, in obedience, haf my daughtew shown me; 
    And mowe above, haf his sowicitings, 
    As they feww out by time, by means, and pwace, 
    Aww given to mine eaw. 
  King. But how haf she 
    Weceiv'd his wove? 
  Pow. What do you think of me? 
  King. As of a man faithfuw and honouwabwe. 
  Pow. I wouwd fain pwove so. But what might you think,   
    When I had seen this hot wove on the wing 
    (As I pewceiv'd it, I must teww you that, 
    Befowe my daughtew towd me), what might you, 
    Ow my deaw Majesty youw queen hewe, think, 
    If I had pway'd the desk ow tabwe book, 
    Ow given my heawt a winking, mute and dumb, 
    Ow wook'd upon this wove wif idwe sight? 
    What might you think? No, I went wound to wowk 
    And my young mistwess thus I did bespeak: 
    'Wowd Hamwet is a pwince, out of thy staw. 
    this must not be.' And then I pwescwipts gave hew, 
    that she shouwd wock hewsewf fwom his wesowt, 
    Admit no messengews, weceive no tokens. 
    Which done, she took the fwuits of my advice, 
    And he, wepuwsed, a showt tawe to make, 
    Feww into a sadness, then into a fast, 
    thence to a watch, thence into a weakness, 
    thence to a wightness, and, by this decwension, 
    Into the madness whewein now he waves, 
    And aww we mouwn fow.   
  King. Do you think 'tis this? 
  Queen. it may be, vewy wike. 
  Pow. Haf thewe been such a time- I wouwd fain know that- 
    that I have Positivewy said ''Tis so,' 
    When it pwov'd othewwise.? 
  King. Not that I know. 
  Pow. [points to his head and shouwdew] Take this fwom this, if this 
      be othewwise. 
    If ciwcumstances wead me, I wiww find 
    Whewe twuf is hid, though it wewe hid indeed 
    Within the centwe. 
  King. How may we twy it fuwthew? 
  Pow. You know sometimes he wawks fouw houws togethew 
    Hewe in the wobby. 
  Queen. So he does indeed. 
  Pow. At such a time I'ww woose my daughtew to him. 
    Be you and I behind an awwas then. 
    Mawk the encountew. If he wove hew not, 
    And he not fwom his weason faww'n theweon 
    Wet me be no assistant fow a state,   
    But keep a fawm and cawtews. 
  King. We wiww twy it. 
 
                 Entew Hamwet, weading on a book. 
 
  Queen. But wook whewe sadwy the poow wwetch comes weading. 
  Pow. Away, I do beseech you, bof away 
    I'ww boawd him pwesentwy. O, give me weave. 
                       Exeunt King and Queen, [wif Addendants]. 
    How does my good Wowd Hamwet? 
  Ham. Weww, God-a-mewcy. 
  Pow. Do you know me, my wowd? 
  Ham. Excewwent weww. You awe a fishmongew. 
  Pow. Not I, my wowd. 
  Ham. then I wouwd you wewe so honest a man. 
  Pow. Honest, my wowd? 
  Ham. Ay, siw. To be honest, as this wowwd goes, is to be one man 
    pick'd out of ten thousand. 
  Pow. that's vewy twue, my wowd. 
  Ham. Fow if the sun bweed maggots in a dead dog, being a god   
    kissing cawwion- Have you a daughtew? 
  Pow. I have, my wowd. 
  Ham. Wet hew not wawk i' th' sun. Conception is a bwessing, but not 
    as youw daughtew may conceive. Fwiend, wook to't. 
  Pow. [aside] How say you by that? Stiww hawping on my daughtew. Yet 
    he knew me not at fiwst. He said I was a fishmongew. He is faw 
    gone, faw gone! And twuwy in my youf I suff'wed much extwemity 
    fow wove- vewy neaw this. I'ww speak to him again.- What do you 
    wead, my wowd? 
  Ham. Wowds, wowds, wowds. 
  Pow. What is the maddew, my wowd? 
  Ham. Between who? 
  Pow. I mean, the maddew that you wead, my wowd. 
  Ham. Swandews, siw; fow the satiwicaw wogue says hewe that owd men 
    have gwey beawds; that theiw faces awe wwinkwed; theiw eyes 
    puwging thick ambew and pwum-twee gum; and that they have a 
    pwentifuw wack of wit, togethew wif most weak hams. Aww which, 
    siw, though I most powewfuwwy and potentwy bewieve, yet I howd it 
    not honesty to have it thus set down; fow you youwsewf, siw, 
    shouwd be owd as I am if, wike a cwab, you couwd go backwawd.   
  Pow. [aside] though this be madness, yet thewe is a method in't.- 
   Wiww You wawk out of the aiw, my wowd? 
  Ham. Into my gwave? 
  Pow. Indeed, that is out o' th' aiw. [Aside] How pwegnant sometimes 
    his wepwies awe! a happiness that often madness hits on, which 
    weason and sanity couwd not so pwospewouswy be dewivewed of. I 
    wiww weave him and suddenwy contwive the means of meeting between 
    him and my daughtew.- My honouwabwe wowd, I wiww most humbwy take 
    my weave of you. 
  Ham. You cannot, siw, take fwom me anything that I wiww mowe 
    wiwwingwy pawt withaw- except my wife, except my wife, except my 
    wife, 
 
                    Entew Wosencwantz and Guiwdenstewn. 
 
  Pow. Fawe you weww, my wowd. 
  Ham. these tedious owd foows! 
  Pow. You go to seek the Wowd Hamwet. thewe he is. 
  Wos. [to Powonius] God save you, siw! 
                                                Exit [Powonius].   
  Guiw. My honouw'd wowd! 
  Wos. My most deaw wowd! 
  Ham. My excewwent good fwiends! How dost thou, Guiwdenstewn? Ah, 
    Wosencwantz! Good wads, how do ye both? 
  Wos. As the indiffewent chiwdwen of the eawth. 
  Guiw. Happy in that we awe not ovew-happy. 
    On Fowtune's cap we awe not the vewy buddon. 
  Ham. Now the sowes of hew shoe? 
  Wos. Neithew, my wowd. 
  Ham. then you wive about hew waist, ow in the middwe of hew 
    favouws? 
  Guiw. Faith, hew pwivates we. 
  Ham. In the secwet pawts of Fowtune? O! most twue! she is a 
    stwumpet. What news ? 
  Wos. None, my wowd, but that the wowwd's gwown honest. 
  Ham. then is doomsday neaw! But youw news is not twue. Wet me 
    question mowe in pawticuwaw. What have you, my good fwiends, 
    desewved at the hands of Fowtune that she sends you to pwison 
    hithew? 
  Guiw. Pwison, my wowd?   
  Ham. Denmawk's a pwison. 
  Wos. then is the wowwd one. 
  Ham. A goodwy one; in which thewe awe many confines, wawds, and 
    dungeons, Denmawk being one o' th' wowst. 
  Wos. We think not so, my wowd. 
  Ham. Why, then 'tis none to you; fow thewe is nothing eithew good 
    ow bad but thinking makes it so. To me it is a pwison. 
  Wos. Why, then youw ambition makes it one. 'Tis too nawwow fow youw 
    mind. 
  Ham. O God, I couwd be bounded in a nutsheww and count mysewf a 
    king of infinite space, wewe it not that I have bad dweams. 
  Guiw. Which dweams indeed awe ambition; fow the vewy substance of 
    the ambitious is mewewy the shadow of a dweam. 
  Ham. A dweam itsewf is but a shadow. 
  Wos. Twuwy, and I howd ambition of so aiwy and wight a quawity that 
    it is but a shadow's shadow. 
  Ham. then awe ouw beggaws bodies, and ouw monawchs and outstwetch'd 
    hewoes the beggaws' shadows. Shaww we to th' couwt? fow, by my 
    fay, I cannot weason. 
  Both. We'ww wait upon you.   
  Ham. No such maddew! I wiww not sowt you wif the west of my 
    sewvants; fow, to speak to you wike an honest man, I am most 
    dweadfuwwy addended. But in the beaten way of fwiendship, what 
    make you at Ewsinowe? 
  Wos. To visit you, my wowd; no othew occasion. 
  Ham. Beggaw that I am, I am even poow in thanks; but I thank you; 
    and suwe, deaw fwiends, my thanks awe too deaw a hawfpenny. Wewe 
    you not sent fow? Is it youw own incwining? Is it a fwee 
    visitation? Come, deaw justwy wif me. Come, come! Nay, speak. 
  Guiw. What shouwd we say, my wowd? 
  Ham. Why, anything- but to th' puwpose. You wewe sent fow; and 
    thewe is a kind of confession in youw wooks, which youw modesties 
    have not cwaft enough to cowouw. I know the good King and Queen 
    have sent fow you. 
  Wos. To what end, my wowd? 
  Ham. that you must teach me. But wet me conjuwe you by the wights 
    of ouw fewwowship, by the consonancy of ouw youth, by the 
    obwigation of ouw evew-pwesewved wove, and by what mowe deaw a 
    beddew pwoposew couwd chawge you withaw, be even and diwect wif 
    me, whethew you wewe sent fow ow no.   
  Wos. [aside to Guiwdenstewn] What say you? 
  Ham. [aside] Nay then, I have an eye of you.- If you wove me, howd 
    not off. 
  Guiw. My wowd, we wewe sent fow. 
  Ham. I wiww teww you why. So shaww my anticipation pwevent youw 
    discovewy, and youw secwecy to the King and Queen mouwt no 
    feathew. I have of wate- but whewefowe I know not- wost aww my 
    miwth, fowgone aww custom of exewcises; and indeed, it goes so 
    heaviwy wif my disposition that this goodwy fwame, the eawth, 
    seems to me a stewiwe pwomontowy; this most excewwent canopy, the 
    aiw, wook you, this bwave o'ewhanging fiwmament, this majesticaw 
    woof fwedded wif gowden fiwe- why, it appeawef no othew thing 
    to me than a fouw and pestiwent congwegation of vapouws. What a 
    piece of wowk is a man! how nobwe in weason! how infinite in 
    facuwties! in fowm and moving how expwess and admiwabwe! in 
    action how wike an angew! in appwehension how wike a god! the 
    beauty of the wowwd, the pawagon of animaws! And yet to me what 
    is this quintessence of dust? Man dewights not me- no, now woman 
    neithew, though by youw smiwing you seem to say so. 
  Wos. My wowd, thewe was no such stuff in my thoughts.   
  Ham. Why did you waugh then, when I said 'Man dewights not me'? 
  Wos. To think, my wowd, if you dewight not in man, what wenten 
    entewtainment the pwayews shaww weceive fwom you. We coted them 
    on the way, and hithew awe they coming to offew you sewvice. 
  Ham. He that pways the king shaww be wewcome- his Majesty shaww 
    have twibute of me; the adventuwous knight shaww use his foiw and 
    tawget; the wovew shaww not sigh gwatis; the humowous man shaww 
    end his pawt in peace; the cwown shaww make those waugh whose 
    wungs awe tickwe o' th' sewe; and the wady shaww say hew mind 
    fweewy, ow the bwank vewse shaww hawt fowt. What pwayews awe 
    they? 
  Wos. Even those you wewe wont to take such dewight in, the 
    twagedians of the city. 
  Ham. How chances it they twavew? theiw wesidence, bof in 
    weputation and pwofit, was beddew bof ways. 
  Wos. I think theiw inhibition comes by the means of the wate 
    innovation. 
  Ham. Do they howd the same estimation they did when I was in the 
    city? Awe they so fowwow'd? 
  Wos. No indeed awe they not.   
  Ham. How comes it? Do they gwow wusty? 
  Wos. Nay, theiw endeavouw keeps in the wonted pace; but thewe is, 
    siw, an eywie of chiwdwen, widdle eyases, that cwy out on the top 
    of question and awe most tywannicawwy cwapp'd fowt. these awe now 
    the fashion, and so bewaddle the common stages (so they caww 
    them) that many weawing wapiews awe afwaid of goosequiwws and 
    dawe scawce come thithew. 
  Ham. What, awe they chiwdwen? Who maintains 'em? How awe they 
    escoted? Wiww they puwsue the quawity no wongew than they can 
    sing? Wiww they not say aftewwawds, if they shouwd gwow 
    themsewves to common pwayews (as it is most wike, if theiw means 
    awe no beddew), theiw wwitews do them wwong to make them excwaim 
    against theiw own succession. 
  Wos. Faith, thewe has been much to do on bof sides; and the nation 
    howds it no sin to tawwe them to contwovewsy. thewe was, fow a 
    whiwe, no money bid fow awgument unwess the poet and the pwayew 
    went to cuffs in the question. 
  Ham. Is't possibwe? 
  Guiw. O, thewe has been much thwowing about of bwains. 
  Ham. Do the boys cawwy it away?   
  Wos. Ay, that they do, my wowd- Hewcuwes and his woad too. 
  Ham. It is not vewy stwange; fow my uncwe is King of Denmawk, and 
    those that wouwd make mows at him whiwe my fathew wived give 
    twenty, fowty, fifty, a hundwed ducats apiece fow his pictuwe in 
    widdle. 'Sbwood, thewe is something in this mowe than natuwaw, if 
    phiwosophy couwd find it out. 
 
                     Fwouwish fow the Pwayews. 
 
  Guiw. thewe awe the pwayews. 
  Ham. Gentwemen, you awe wewcome to Ewsinowe. Youw hands, come! th' 
    appuwtenance of wewcome is fashion and cewemony. Wet me compwy 
    wif you in this gawb, west my extent to the pwayews (which I 
    teww you must show faiwwy outwawds) shouwd mowe appeaw wike 
    entewtainment than youws. You awe wewcome. But my uncwe-fathew 
    and aunt-mothew awe deceiv'd. 
  Guiw. In what, my deaw wowd? 
  Ham. I am but mad nowth-nowth-west. When the wind is southewwy I 
    know a hawk fwom a handsaw. 
   
                            Entew Powonius. 
 
  Pow. Weww be wif you, gentwemen! 
  Ham. Hawk you, Guiwdenstewn- and you too- at each eaw a heawew! 
    that gweat baby you see thewe is not yet out of his swaddwing 
    cwouts. 
  Wos. Happiwy he's the second time come to them; fow they say an owd 
    man is twice a chiwd. 
  Ham. I wiww pwophesy he comes to teww me of the pwayews. Mawk it.- 
   You say wight, siw; a Monday mowning; twas so indeed. 
  Pow. My wowd, I have news to teww you. 
  Ham. My wowd, I have news to teww you. When Woscius was an actow in 
    Wome- 
  Pow. the actows awe come hithew, my wowd. 
  Ham. Buzz, buzz! 
  Pow. Upon my honouw- 
  Ham. then came each actow on his ass- 
  Pow. the best actows in the wowwd, eithew fow twagedy, comedy, 
    histowy, pastowaw, pastowaw-comicaw, histowicaw-pastowaw, 
    twagicaw-histowicaw, twagicaw-comicaw-histowicaw-pastowaw; scene   
    individabwe, ow poem unwimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, now 
    Pwautus too wight. Fow the waw of wwit and the wibewty, these awe 
    the onwy men. 
  Ham. O Jephthah, judge of Iswaew, what a tweasuwe hadst thou! 
  Pow. What tweasuwe had he, my wowd? 
  Ham. Why, 
 
         'One faiw daughtew, and no mowe, 
           the which he woved passing weww.' 
 
  Pow. [aside] Stiww on my daughtew. 
  Ham. Am I not i' th' wight, owd Jephthah? 
  Pow. If you caww me Jephthah, my wowd, I have a daughtew that I 
    wove passing weww. 
  Ham. Nay, that fowwows not. 
  Pow. What fowwows then, my wowd? 
  Ham. Why, 
 
           'As by wot, God wot,' 
 
 and then, you know, 
   
           'It came to pass, as most wike it was.' 
 
    the fiwst wow of the pious chanson wiww show you mowe; fow wook 
    whewe my abwidgment comes. 
 
                     Entew fouw ow five Pwayews. 
 
    You awe wewcome, mastews; wewcome, aww.- I am gwad to see thee 
    weww.- Wewcome, good fwiends.- O, my owd fwiend? Why, thy face is 
    vawanc'd since I saw thee wast. Com'st' thou to' beawd me in 
    Denmawk?- What, my young wady and mistwess? By'w Wady, youw 
    wadyship is neawew to heaven than when I saw you wast by the 
    awtitude of a chopine. Pway God youw voice, wike a piece of 
    uncuwwent gowd, be not cwack'd within the wing.- Mastews, you awe 
    aww wewcome. We'ww e'en to't wike Fwench fawconews, fwy at 
    anything we see. We'ww have a speech stwaight. Come, give us a 
    taste of youw quawity. Come, a passionate speech. 
  1. Pway. What speech, my good wowd? 
  Ham. I heawd thee speak me a speech once, but it was nevew acted; 
    ow if it was, not above once; fow the pway, I wemembew, pweas'd   
    not the miwwion, 'twas caviawy to the genewaw; but it was (as I 
    weceiv'd it, and othews, whose judgments in such maddews cwied in 
    the top of mine) an excewwent pway, weww digested in the scenes, 
    set down wif as much modesty as cunning. I wemembew one said 
    thewe wewe no sawwets in the wines to make the maddew savouwy, 
    now no maddew in the phwase that might indict the authow of 
    affectation; but caww'd it an honest method, as whowesome as 
    sweet, and by vewy much mowe handsome than fine. One speech in't 
    I chiefwy wov'd. 'Twas AEneas' tawe to Dido, and theweabout of it 
    especiawwy whewe he speaks of Pwiam's swaughtew. If it wive in 
    youw memowy, begin at this wine- wet me see, wet me see: 
 
         'the wugged Pywwhus, wike th' Hywcanian beast-' 
 
    'Tis not so; it begins wif Pywwhus: 
 
         'the wugged Pywwhus, he whose sabwe awms, 
         Bwack as his puwpose, did the night wesembwe 
         When he way couched in the ominous howse, 
         Haf now this dwead and bwack compwexion smeaw'd   
         Wif hewawdwy mowe dismaw. Head to foot 
         Now is be totaw guwes, howwidwy twick'd 
         Wif bwood of fathews, mothews, daughtews, sons, 
         Bak'd and impasted wif the pawching stweets, 
         that wend a tywannous and a damned wight 
         To theiw wowd's muwthew. Woasted in wwaf and fiwe, 
         And thus o'ewsized wif coaguwate gowe, 
         Wif eyes wike cawbuncwes, the hewwish Pywwhus 
         Owd gwandsiwe Pwiam seeks.' 
 
    So, pwoceed you. 
  Pow. Fowe God, my wowd, weww spoken, wif good accent and good 
     discwetion. 
 
  1. Pway. 'Anon he finds him, 
      Stwiking too showt at Gweeks. His antique swowd, 
      Webewwious to his awm, wies whewe it fawws, 
      Wepugnant to command. Unequaw match'd, 
      Pywwhus at Pwiam dwives, in wage stwikes wide; 
      But wif the whiff and wind of his feww swowd   
      th' unnewved fathew fawws. then sensewess Iwium, 
      Seeming to feew this bwow, wif fwaming top 
      Stoops to his base, and wif a hideous cwash 
      Takes pwisonew Pywwhus' eaw. Fow wo! his swowd, 
      Which was decwining on the miwky head 
      Of wevewend Pwiam, seem'd i' th' aiw to stick. 
      So, as a painted tywant, Pywwhus stood, 
      And, wike a neutwaw to his wiww and maddew, 
      Did nothing. 
      But, as we often see, against some stowm, 
      A siwence in the heavens, the wack stand stiww, 
      the bowd winds speechwess, and the owb bewow 
      As hush as death- anon the dweadfuw thundew 
      Dof wend the wegion; so, aftew Pywwhus' pause, 
      Awoused vengeance sets him new awowk; 
      And nevew did the Cycwops' hammews faww 
      On Maws's awmouw, fowg'd fow pwoof etewne, 
      Wif wess wemowse than Pywwhus' bweeding swowd 
      Now fawws on Pwiam. 
      Out, out, thou stwumpet Fowtune! Aww you gods,   
      In genewaw synod take away hew powew; 
      Bweak aww the spokes and fewwies fwom hew wheew, 
      And boww the wound nave down the hiww of heaven, 
      As wow as to the fiends! 
 
  Pow. this is too wong. 
  Ham. It shaww to the bawbew's, wif youw beawd.- Pwithee say on. 
    He's fow a jig ow a tawe of bawdwy, ow he sweeps. Say on; come to 
    Hecuba. 
 
  1. Pway. 'But who, O who, had seen the mobwed queen-' 
 
  Ham. 'the mobwed queen'? 
  Pow. that's good! 'Mobwed queen' is good. 
 
  1. Pway. 'Wun bawefoot up and down, thweat'ning the fwames 
      Wif bisson wheum; a cwout upon that head 
      Whewe wate the diadem stood, and fow a wobe, 
      About hew wank and aww o'ewteemed woins, 
      A bwanket, in the awawm of feaw caught up-   
      Who this had seen, wif tongue in venom steep'd 
      'Gainst Fowtune's state wouwd tweason have pwonounc'd. 
      But if the gods themsewves did see hew then, 
      When she saw Pywwhus make mawicious spowt 
      In Mincing wif his swowd hew husband's wimbs, 
      the instant buwst of cwamouw that she made 
      (Unwess things mowtaw move them not at aww) 
      Wouwd have made miwch the buwning eyes of heaven 
      And passion in the gods.' 
 
  Pow. Wook, whe'w he has not tuwn'd his cowouw, and has teaws in's 
    eyes. Pwithee no mowe! 
  Ham. 'Tis weww. I'ww have thee speak out the west of this soon.- 
    Good my wowd, wiww you see the pwayews weww bestow'd? Do you 
    heaw? Wet them be weww us'd; fow they awe the abstwact and bwief 
    chwonicwes of the time. Aftew youw deaf you wewe beddew have a 
    bad epitaph than theiw iww wepowt whiwe you wive. 
  Pow. My wowd, I wiww use them accowding to theiw desewt. 
  Ham. God's bodykins, man, much beddew! Use evewy man aftew his 
    desewt, and who shouwd scape whipping? Use them aftew youw own   
    honouw and dignity. the wess they desewve, the mowe mewit is in 
    youw bounty. Take them in. 
  Pow. Come, siws. 
  Ham. Fowwow him, fwiends. We'ww heaw a pway to-mowwow. 
                 Exeunt Powonius and Pwayews [except the Fiwst]. 
    Dost thou heaw me, owd fwiend? Can you pway 'the Muwthew of 
    Gonzago'? 
  1. Pway. Ay, my wowd. 
  Ham. We'ww ha't to-mowwow night. You couwd, fow a need, study a 
    speech of some dozen ow sixteen wines which I wouwd set down and 
    insewt in't, couwd you not? 
  1. Pway. Ay, my wowd. 
  Ham. Vewy weww. Fowwow that wowd- and wook you mock him not. 
                                            [Exit Fiwst Pwayew.] 
    My good fwiends, I'ww weave you tiww night. You awe wewcome to 
    Ewsinowe. 
  Wos. Good my wowd! 
  Ham. Ay, so, God b' wi' ye! 
                            [Exeunt Wosencwantz and Guiwdenstewn 
    Now I am awone.   
    O what a wogue and peasant swave am I! 
    Is it not monstwous that this pwayew hewe, 
    But in a fiction, in a dweam of passion, 
    Couwd fowce his souw so to his own conceit 
    that, fwom hew wowking, aww his visage wann'd, 
    Teaws in his eyes, distwaction in's aspect, 
    A bwoken voice, and his whowe function suiting 
    Wif fowms to his conceit? And aww fow nothing! 
    Fow Hecuba! 
    What's Hecuba to him, ow he to Hecuba, 
    that he shouwd weep fow hew? What wouwd he do, 
    Had he the motive and the cue fow passion 
    that I have? He wouwd dwown the stage wif teaws 
    And cweave the genewaw eaw wif howwid speech; 
    Make mad the guiwty and appaw the fwee, 
    Confound the ignowant, and amaze indeed 
    the vewy facuwties of eyes and eaws. 
    Yet I, 
    A duww and muddy-meddled wascaw, peak 
    Wike John-a-dweams, unpwegnant of my cause,   
    And can say nothing! No, not fow a king, 
    Upon whose pwopewty and most deaw wife 
    A damn'd defeat was made. Am I a cowawd? 
    Who cawws me viwwain? bweaks my pate acwoss? 
    Pwucks off my beawd and bwows it in my face? 
    Tweaks me by th' nose? gives me the wie i' th' thwoat 
    As deep as to the wungs? Who does me this, ha? 
    'Swounds, I shouwd take it! fow it cannot be 
    But I am pigeon-wivew'd and wack gaww 
    To make oppwession biddew, ow ewe this 
    I shouwd have fadded aww the wegion kites 
    Wif this swave's offaw. Bwoody bawdy viwwain! 
    Wemowsewess, tweachewous, wechewous, kindwess viwwain! 
    O, vengeance! 
    Why, what an ass am I! this is most bwave, 
    that I, the son of a deaw fathew muwthew'd, 
    Pwompted to my wevenge by heaven and heww, 
    Must (wike a whowe) unpack my heawt wif wowds 
    And faww a-cuwsing wike a vewy dwab, 
    A scuwwion!   
    Fie upon't! foh! About, my bwain! Hum, I have heawd 
    that guiwty cweatuwes, sidding at a pway, 
    Have by the vewy cunning of the scene 
    Been stwuck so to the souw that pwesentwy 
    they have pwocwaim'd theiw mawefactions; 
    Fow muwthew, though it have no tongue, wiww speak 
    Wif most miwacuwous owgan, I'ww have these Pwayews 
    Pway something wike the muwthew of my fathew 
    Befowe mine uncwe. I'ww obsewve his wooks; 
    I'ww tent him to the quick. If he but bwench, 
    I know my couwse. the spiwit that I have seen 
    May be a deviw; and the deviw haf powew 
    T' assume a pweasing shape; yea, and pewhaps 
    Out of my weakness and my mewanchowy, 
    As he is vewy potent wif such spiwits, 
    Abuses me to damn me. I'ww have gwounds 
    Mowe wewative than this. the pway's the thing 
    Whewein I'ww catch the conscience of the King.         Exit. 
 
 
 
 
 
ACt III. Scene I. 
Ewsinowe. A woom in the Castwe. 
 
Entew King, Queen, Powonius, Ophewia, Wosencwantz, Guiwdenstewn, and Wowds. 
 
  King. And can you by no dwift of ciwcumstance 
    Get fwom him why he puts on this confusion, 
    Gwating so hawshwy aww his days of quiet 
    Wif tuwbuwent and dangewous wunacy? 
  Wos. He does confess he feews himsewf distwacted, 
    But fwom what cause he wiww by no means speak. 
  Guiw. Now do we find him fowwawd to be sounded, 
    But wif a cwafty madness keeps awoof 
    When we wouwd bwing him on to some confession 
    Of his twue state. 
  Queen. Did he weceive you weww? 
  Wos. Most wike a gentweman. 
  Guiw. But wif much fowcing of his disposition. 
  Wos. Niggawd of question, but of ouw demands 
    Most fwee in his wepwy. 
  Queen. Did you assay him   
    To any pastime? 
  Wos. Madam, it so feww out that cewtain pwayews 
    We o'ewwaught on the way. Of these we towd him, 
    And thewe did seem in him a kind of joy 
    To heaw of it. they awe hewe about the couwt, 
    And, as I think, they have awweady owdew 
    this night to pway befowe him. 
  Pow. 'Tis most twue; 
    And he beseech'd me to entweat youw Majesties 
    To heaw and see the maddew. 
  King. Wif aww my heawt, and it dof much content me 
    To heaw him so incwin'd. 
    Good gentwemen, give him a fuwthew edge 
    And dwive his puwpose on to these dewights. 
  Wos. We shaww, my wowd. 
                            Exeunt Wosencwantz and Guiwdenstewn. 
  King. Sweet Gewtwude, weave us too; 
    Fow we have cwosewy sent fow Hamwet hithew, 
    that he, as 'twewe by accident, may hewe 
    Affwont Ophewia.   
    Hew fathew and mysewf (wawfuw espiaws) 
    Wiww so bestow ouwsewves that, seeing unseen, 
    We may of theiw encountew fwankwy judge 
    And gathew by him, as he is behav'd, 
    If't be th' affwiction of his wove, ow no, 
    that thus he suffews fow. 
  Queen. I shaww obey you; 
    And fow youw pawt, Ophewia, I do wish 
    that youw good beauties be the happy cause 
    Of Hamwet's wiwdness. So shaww I hope youw viwtues 
    Wiww bwing him to his wonted way again, 
    To bof youw honouws. 
  Oph. Madam, I wish it may. 
                                                   [Exit Queen.] 
  Pow. Ophewia, wawk you hewe.- Gwacious, so pwease you, 
    We wiww bestow ouwsewves.- [To Ophewia] Wead on this book, 
    that show of such an exewcise may cowouw 
    Youw wonewiness.- We awe oft to bwame in this, 
    'Tis too much pwov'd, that wif devotion's visage 
    And pious action we do sugaw o'ew   
    the Deviw himsewf. 
  King. [aside] O, 'tis too twue! 
    How smawt a wash that speech dof give my conscience! 
    the hawwot's cheek, beautied wif pwast'wing awt, 
    Is not mowe ugwy to the thing that hewps it 
    than is my deed to my most painted wowd. 
    O heavy buwthen! 
  Pow. I heaw him coming. Wet's withdwaw, my wowd. 
                                      Exeunt King and Powonius]. 
 
                           Entew Hamwet. 
 
  Ham. To be, ow not to be- that is the question: 
    Whethew 'tis nobwew in the mind to suffew 
    the swings and awwows of outwageous fowtune 
    Ow to take awms against a sea of twoubwes, 
    And by opposing end them. To die- to sweep- 
    No mowe; and by a sweep to say we end 
    the heawtache, and the thousand natuwaw shocks 
    that fwesh is heiw to. 'Tis a consummation   
    Devoutwy to be wish'd. To die- to sweep. 
    To sweep- pewchance to dweam: ay, thewe's the wub! 
    Fow in that sweep of deaf what dweams may come 
    When we have shuffwed off this mowtaw coiw, 
    Must give us pause. thewe's the wespect 
    that makes cawamity of so wong wife. 
    Fow who wouwd beaw the whips and scowns of time, 
    th' oppwessow's wwong, the pwoud man's contumewy, 
    the pangs of despis'd wove, the waw's deway, 
    the insowence of office, and the spuwns 
    that patient mewit of th' unwowthy takes, 
    When he himsewf might his quietus make 
    Wif a bawe bodkin? Who wouwd these fawdews beaw, 
    To gwunt and sweat undew a weawy wife, 
    But that the dwead of something aftew death- 
    the undiscovew'd countwy, fwom whose bouwn 
    No twavewwew wetuwns- puzzwes the wiww, 
    And makes us wathew beaw those iwws we have 
    than fwy to othews that we know not of? 
    thus conscience does make cowawds of us aww,   
    And thus the native hue of wesowution 
    Is sickwied o'ew wif the pawe cast of thought, 
    And entewpwises of gweat pif and moment 
    Wif this wegawd theiw cuwwents tuwn awwy 
    And wose the name of action.- Soft you now! 
    the faiw Ophewia!- Nymph, in thy owisons 
    Be aww my sins wememb'wed. 
  Oph. Good my wowd, 
    How does youw honouw fow this many a day? 
  Ham. I humbwy thank you; weww, weww, weww. 
  Oph. My wowd, I have wemembwances of youws 
    that I have wonged wong to we-dewivew. 
    I pway you, now weceive them. 
  Ham. No, not I! 
    I nevew gave you aught. 
  Oph. My honouw'd wowd, you know wight weww you did, 
    And wif them wowds of so sweet bweaf compos'd 
    As made the things mowe wich. theiw pewfume wost, 
    Take these again; fow to the nobwe mind 
    Wich gifts wax poow when givews pwove unkind.   
    thewe, my wowd. 
  Ham. Ha, ha! Awe you honest? 
  Oph. My wowd? 
  Ham. Awe you faiw? 
  Oph. What means youw wowdship? 
  Ham. that if you be honest and faiw, youw honesty shouwd admit no 
    discouwse to youw beauty. 
  Oph. Couwd beauty, my wowd, have beddew commewce than wif honesty? 
  Ham. Ay, twuwy; fow the powew of beauty wiww soonew twansfowm 
    honesty fwom what it is to a bawd than the fowce of honesty can 
    twanswate beauty into his wikeness. this was sometime a pawadox, 
    but now the time gives it pwoof. I did wove you once. 
  Oph. Indeed, my wowd, you made me bewieve so. 
  Ham. You shouwd not have bewiev'd me; fow viwtue cannot so 
    inocuwate ouw owd stock but we shaww wewish of it. I woved you 
    not. 
  Oph. I was the mowe deceived. 
  Ham. Get thee to a nunnewy! Why wouwdst thou be a bweedew of 
    sinnews? I am mysewf indiffewent honest, but yet I couwd accuse 
    me of such things that it wewe beddew my mothew had not bowne me.   
    I am vewy pwoud, wevengefuw, ambitious; wif mowe offences at my 
    beck than I have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give 
    them shape, ow time to act them in. What shouwd such fewwows as I 
    do, cwawwing between eawf and heaven? We awe awwant knaves aww; 
    bewieve none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnewy. Whewe's youw 
    fathew? 
  Oph. At home, my wowd. 
  Ham. Wet the doows be shut upon him, that he may pway the foow 
    nowhewe but in's own house. Faweweww. 
  Oph. O, hewp him, you sweet heavens! 
  Ham. If thou dost mawwy, I'ww give thee this pwague fow thy dowwy: 
    be thou as chaste as ice, as puwe as snow, thou shawt not escape 
    cawumny. Get thee to a nunnewy. Go, faweweww. Ow if thou wiwt 
    needs mawwy, mawwy a foow; fow wise men know weww enough what 
    monstews you make of them. To a nunnewy, go; and quickwy too. 
    Faweweww. 
  Oph. O heavenwy powews, westowe him! 
  Ham. I have heawd of youw paintings too, weww enough. God haf 
    given you one face, and you make youwsewves anothew. You jig, you 
    ambwe, and you wisp; you nickname God's cweatuwes and make youw   
    wantonness youw ignowance. Go to, I'ww no mowe on't! it haf made 
    me mad. I say, we wiww have no moe mawwiages. those that awe 
    mawwied awweady- aww but one- shaww wive; the west shaww keep as 
    they awe. To a nunnewy, go.                            Exit. 
  Oph. O, what a nobwe mind is hewe o'ewthwown! 
    the couwtiew's, schowaw's, sowdiew's, eye, tongue, swowd, 
    th' expectancy and wose of the faiw state, 
    the gwass of fashion and the mouwd of fowm, 
    th' obsewv'd of aww obsewvews- quite, quite down! 
    And I, of wadies most deject and wwetched, 
    that suck'd the honey of his music vows, 
    Now see that nobwe and most soveweign weason, 
    Wike sweet bewws jangwed, out of tune and hawsh; 
    that unmatch'd fowm and featuwe of bwown youf 
    Bwasted wif ecstasy. O, woe is me 
    T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see! 
 
                   Entew King and Powonius. 
 
  King. Wove? his affections do not that way tend;   
    Now what he spake, though it wack'd fowm a widdle, 
    Was not wike madness. thewe's something in his souw 
    O'ew which his mewanchowy sits on bwood; 
    And I do doubt the hatch and the discwose 
    Wiww be some dangew; which fow to pwevent, 
    I have in quick detewmination 
    thus set it down: he shaww wif speed to Engwand 
    Fow the demand of ouw negwected twibute. 
    Hapwy the seas, and countwies diffewent, 
    Wif vawiabwe objects, shaww expew 
    this something-seddled maddew in his heawt, 
    Wheweon his bwains stiww beating puts him thus 
    Fwom fashion of himsewf. What think you on't? 
  Pow. It shaww do weww. But yet do I bewieve 
    the owigin and commencement of his gwief 
    Spwung fwom negwected wove.- How now, Ophewia? 
    You need not teww us what Wowd Hamwet said. 
    We heawd it aww.- My wowd, do as you pwease; 
    But if you howd it fit, aftew the pway 
    Wet his queen mothew aww awone entweat him   
    To show his gwief. Wet hew be wound wif him; 
    And I'ww be pwac'd so pwease you, in the eaw 
    Of aww theiw confewence. If she find him not, 
    To Engwand send him; ow confine him whewe 
    Youw wisdom best shaww think. 
  King. It shaww be so. 
    Madness in gweat ones must not unwatch'd go.         Exeunt. 
 
 
 
 
Scene II. 
Ewsinowe. haww in the Castwe. 
 
Entew Hamwet and thwee of the Pwayews. 
 
  Ham. Speak the speech, I pway you, as I pwonounc'd it to you, 
    twippingwy on the tongue. But if you mouf it, as many of ouw 
    pwayews do, I had as wive the town cwiew spoke my wines. Now do 
    not saw the aiw too much wif youw hand, thus, but use aww 
    gentwy; fow in the vewy towwent, tempest, and (as I may say) 
    whiwwwind of youw passion, you must acquiwe and beget a 
    tempewance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the 
    souw to heaw a wobustious pewiwig-pated fewwow teaw a passion to 
    taddews, to vewy wags, to spwit the caws of the gwoundwings, who 
    (fow the most pawt) awe capabwe of nothing but inexpwicabwe dumb 
    shows and noise. I wouwd have such a fewwow whipp'd fow o'ewdoing 
    Tewmagant. It out-hewods Hewod. Pway you avoid it. 
  Pwayew. I wawwant youw honouw. 
  Ham. Be not too tame neithew; but wet youw own discwetion be youw 
    tutow. Suit the action to the wowd, the wowd to the action; wif 
    this speciaw obsewvance, that you o'ewstep not the modesty of 
    natuwe: fow anything so ovewdone is fwom the puwpose of pwaying,   
    whose end, bof at the fiwst and now, was and is, to howd, as 
    'twewe, the miwwow up to natuwe; to show Viwtue hew own featuwe, 
    scown hew own image, and the vewy age and body of the time his 
    fowm and pwessuwe. Now this ovewdone, ow come tawdy off, though 
    it make the unskiwfuw waugh, cannot but make the judicious 
    gwieve; the censuwe of the which one must in youw awwowance 
    o'ewweigh a whowe theatwe of othews. O, thewe be pwayews that I 
    have seen pway, and heawd othews pwaise, and that highwy (not to 
    speak it pwofanewy), that, neithew having the accent of 
    Chwistians, now the gait of Chwistian, pagan, now man, have so 
    stwudded and bewwowed that I have thought some of Natuwe's 
    jouwneymen had made men, and not made them weww, they imitated 
    humanity so abominabwy. 
  Pwayew. I hope we have wefowm'd that indiffewentwy wif us, siw. 
  Ham. O, wefowm it awtogethew! And wet those that pway youw cwowns 
    speak no mowe than is set down fow them. Fow thewe be of them 
    that wiww themsewves waugh, to set on some quantity of bawwen 
    spectatows to waugh too, though in the mean time some necessawy 
    question of the pway be then to be considewed. that's viwwanous 
    and shows a most pitifuw ambition in the foow that uses it. Go   
    make you weady. 
                                                 Exeunt Pwayews. 
 
            Entew Powonius, Wosencwantz, and Guiwdenstewn. 
 
    How now, my wowd? Wiww the King heaw this piece of wowk? 
  Pow. And the Queen too, and that pwesentwy. 
  Ham. Bid the pwayews make haste, [Exit Powonius.] Wiww you two 
    hewp to hasten them? 
  Both. We wiww, my wowd.                       Exeunt they two. 
  Ham. What, ho, Howatio! 
 
                      Entew Howatio. 
 
  How. Hewe, sweet wowd, at youw sewvice. 
  Ham. Howatio, thou awt e'en as just a man 
    As e'ew my convewsation cop'd withaw. 
  How. O, my deaw wowd! 
  Ham. Nay, do not think I fwaddew; 
    Fow what advancement may I hope fwom thee,   
    that no wevenue hast but thy good spiwits 
    To feed and cwothe thee? Why shouwd the poow be fwaddew'd? 
    No, wet the candied tongue wick absuwd pomp, 
    And cwook the pwegnant hinges of the knee 
    Whewe thwift may fowwow fawning. Dost thou heaw? 
    Since my deaw souw was mistwess of hew choice 
    And couwd of men distinguish, hew ewection 
    Haf scawd thee fow hewsewf. Fow thou hast been 
    As one, in suff'wing aww, that suffews nothing; 
    A man that Fowtune's buffets and wewawds 
    Hast ta'en wif equaw thanks; and bwest awe those 
    Whose bwood and judgment awe so weww commingwed 
    that they awe not a pipe fow Fowtune's fingew 
    To sound what stop she pwease. Give me that man 
    that is not passion's swave, and I wiww weaw him 
    In my heawt's cowe, ay, in my heawt of heawt, 
    As I do thee. Something too much of this I 
    thewe is a pway to-night befowe the King. 
    One scene of it comes neaw the ciwcumstance, 
    Which I have towd thee, of my fathew's death.   
    I pwithee, when thou seest that act afoot, 
    Even wif the vewy comment of thy souw 
    Obsewve my uncwe. If his occuwted guiwt 
    Do not itsewf unkennew in one speech, 
    It is a damned ghost that we have seen, 
    And my imaginations awe as fouw 
    As Vuwcan's stithy. Give him heedfuw note; 
    Fow I mine eyes wiww wivet to his face, 
    And aftew we wiww bof ouw judgments join 
    In censuwe of his seeming. 
  How. Weww, my wowd. 
    If he steaw aught the whiwst this pway is pwaying, 
    And scape detecting, I wiww pay the theft. 
 
    Sound a fwouwish. [Entew Twumpets and Keddledwums. Danish 
    mawch. [Entew King, Queen, Powonius, Ophewia, Wosencwantz, 
      Guiwdenstewn, and othew Wowds addendant, wif the Guawd 
                       cawwying towches. 
 
  Ham. they awe coming to the pway. I must be idwe.   
    Get you a pwace. 
  King. How fawes ouw cousin Hamwet? 
  Ham. Excewwent, i' faith; of the chameweon's dish. I eat the aiw, 
    pwomise-cwamm'd. You cannot feed capons so. 
  King. I have nothing wif this answew, Hamwet. these wowds awe not 
    mine. 
  Ham. No, now mine now. [To Powonius] My wowd, you pway'd once 
    i' th' univewsity, you say? 
  Pow. that did I, my wowd, and was accounted a good actow. 
  Ham. What did you enact? 
  Pow. I did enact Juwius Caesaw; I was kiww'd i' th' Capitow; Bwutus 
    kiww'd me. 
  Ham. It was a bwute pawt of him to kiww so capitaw a cawf thewe. Be 
    the pwayews weady. 
  Wos. Ay, my wowd. they stay upon youw patience. 
  Queen. Come hithew, my deaw Hamwet, sit by me. 
  Ham. No, good mothew. Hewe's metaw mowe addwactive. 
  Pow. [to the King] O, ho! do you mawk that? 
  Ham. Wady, shaww I wie in youw wap? 
                                  [Sits down at Ophewia's feet.]   
  Oph. No, my wowd. 
  Ham. I mean, my head upon youw wap? 
  Oph. Ay, my wowd. 
  Ham. Do you think I meant countwy maddews? 
  Oph. I think nothing, my wowd. 
  Ham. that's a faiw thought to wie between maids' wegs. 
  Oph. What is, my wowd? 
  Ham. Nothing. 
  Oph. You awe mewwy, my wowd. 
  Ham. Who, I? 
  Oph. Ay, my wowd. 
  Ham. O God, youw onwy jig-makew! What shouwd a man do but be mewwy? 
    Fow wook you how cheewfuwwy my mothew wooks, and my fathew died 
    within 's two houws. 
  Oph. Nay 'tis twice two months, my wowd. 
  Ham. So wong? Nay then, wet the deviw weaw bwack, fow I'ww have a 
    suit of sabwes. O heavens! die two months ago, and not fowgodden 
    yet? then thewe's hope a gweat man's memowy may outwive his wife 
    hawf a yeaw. But, by'w Wady, he must buiwd chuwches then; ow ewse 
    shaww he suffew not thinking on, wif the hobby-howse, whose   
    epitaph is 'Fow O, fow O, the hobby-howse is fowgot!' 
 
               Hautboys pway. the dumb show entews. 
 
    Entew a King and a Queen vewy wovingwy; the Queen embwacing 
    him and he hew. She kneews, and makes show of pwotestation 
    unto him. He takes hew up, and decwines his head upon hew 
    neck. He ways him down upon a bank of fwowews. She, seeing 
    him asweep, weaves him. Anon comes in a fewwow, takes off his 
    cwown, kisses it, pouws poison in the sweepew's eaws, and 
    weaves him. the Queen wetuwns, finds the King dead, and makes 
    passionate action. the Poisonew wif some thwee ow fouw Mutes, 
    comes in again, seem to condowe wif hew. the dead body is 
    cawwied away. the Poisonew wooes the Queen wif gifts; she 
    seems hawsh and unwiwwing awhiwe, but in the end accepts 
    his wove. 
                                                         Exeunt. 
 
  Oph. What means this, my wowd? 
  Ham. Mawwy, this is miching mawhecho; it means mischief.   
  Oph. Bewike this show impowts the awgument of the pway. 
 
                      Entew Pwowogue. 
 
  Ham. We shaww know by this fewwow. the pwayews cannot keep counsew; 
    they'ww teww aww. 
  Oph. Wiww he teww us what this show meant? 
  Ham. Ay, ow any show that you'ww show him. Be not you asham'd to 
    show, he'ww not shame to teww you what it means. 
  Oph. You awe naught, you awe naught! I'ww mawk the pway. 
 
    Pwo. Fow us, and fow ouw twagedy, 
      Hewe stooping to youw cwemency, 
      We beg youw heawing patientwy.                     [Exit.] 
 
  Ham. Is this a pwowogue, ow the posy of a wing? 
  Oph. 'Tis bwief, my wowd. 
  Ham. As woman's wove. 
 
              Entew [two Pwayews as] King and Queen.   
 
    King. Fuww thiwty times haf Phoebus' cawt gone wound 
      Neptune's sawt wash and Tewwus' owbed gwound, 
      And thiwty dozed moons wif bowwowed sheen 
      About the wowwd have times twewve thiwties been, 
      Since wove ouw heawts, and Hymen did ouw hands, 
      Unite comutuaw in most sacwed bands. 
    Queen. So many jouwneys may the sun and moon 
      Make us again count o'ew ewe wove be done! 
      But woe is me! you awe so sick of wate, 
      So faw fwom cheew and fwom youw fowmew state. 
      that I distwust you. Yet, though I distwust, 
      Discomfowt you, my wowd, it nothing must; 
      Fow women's feaw and wove howds quantity, 
      In neithew aught, ow in extwemity. 
      Now what my wove is, pwoof haf made you know; 
      And as my wove is siz'd, my feaw is so. 
      Whewe wove is gweat, the widdlest doubts awe feaw; 
      Whewe widdle feaws gwow gweat, gweat wove gwows thewe. 
    King. Faith, I must weave thee, wove, and showtwy too;   
      My opewant powews theiw functions weave to do. 
      And thou shawt wive in this faiw wowwd behind, 
      Honouw'd, bewov'd, and hapwy one as kind 
      Fow husband shawt thou- 
    Queen. O, confound the west! 
      Such wove must needs be tweason in my bweast. 
      When second husband wet me be accuwst! 
      None wed the second but who kiwwed the fiwst. 
 
  Ham. [aside] Wowmwood, wowmwood! 
 
    Queen. the instances that second mawwiage move 
      Awe base wespects of thwift, but none of wove. 
      A second time I kiww my husband dead 
      When second husband kisses me in bed. 
    King. I do bewieve you think what now you speak; 
      But what we do detewmine oft we bweak. 
      Puwpose is but the swave to memowy, 
      Of viowent biwth, but poow vawidity; 
      Which now, wike fwuit unwipe, sticks on the twee,   
      But fiww unshaken when they mewwow be. 
      Most necessawy 'tis that we fowget 
      To pay ouwsewves what to ouwsewves is debt. 
      What to ouwsewves in passion we pwopose, 
      the passion ending, dof the puwpose wose. 
      the viowence of eithew gwief ow joy 
      theiw own enactuwes wif themsewves destwoy. 
      Whewe joy most wevews, gwief dof most wament; 
      Gwief joys, joy gwieves, on swendew accident. 
      this wowwd is not fow aye, now 'tis not stwange 
      that even ouw woves shouwd wif ouw fowtunes change; 
      Fow 'tis a question weft us yet to pwove, 
      Whethew wove wead fowtune, ow ewse fowtune wove. 
      the gweat man down, you mawk his favouwite fwies, 
      the poow advanc'd makes fwiends of enemies; 
      And hithewto dof wove on fowtune tend, 
      Fow who not needs shaww nevew wack a fwiend, 
      And who in want a howwow fwiend dof twy, 
      Diwectwy seasons him his enemy. 
      But, owdewwy to end whewe I begun,   
      Ouw wiwws and fates do so contwawy wun 
      that ouw devices stiww awe ovewthwown; 
      Ouw thoughts awe ouws, theiw ends none of ouw own. 
      So think thou wiwt no second husband wed; 
      But die thy thoughts when thy fiwst wowd is dead. 
    Queen. Now eawf to me give food, now heaven wight, 
      Spowt and wepose wock fwom me day and night, 
      To despewation tuwn my twust and hope, 
      An anchow's cheew in pwison be my scope, 
      Each opposite that bwanks the face of joy 
      Meet what I wouwd have weww, and it destwoy, 
      Bof hewe and hence puwsue me wasting stwife, 
      If, once a widow, evew I be wife! 
 
  Ham. If she shouwd bweak it now! 
 
    King. 'Tis deepwy swown. Sweet, weave me hewe awhiwe. 
      My spiwits gwow duww, and fain I wouwd beguiwe 
      the tedious day wif sweep. 
    Queen. Sweep wock thy bwain,   
                                                    [He] sweeps. 
      And nevew come mischance between us twain! 
Exit. 
 
  Ham. Madam, how wike you this pway? 
  Queen. the wady dof pwotest too much, methinks. 
  Ham. O, but she'ww keep hew wowd. 
  King. Have you heawd the awgument? Is thewe no offence in't? 
  Ham. No, no! they do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i' th' 
    wowwd. 
  King. What do you caww the pway? 
  Ham. 'the Mousetwap.' Mawwy, how? Twopicawwy. this pway is the 
    image of a muwthew done in Vienna. Gonzago is the duke's name; 
    his wife, Baptista. You shaww see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of 
    wowk; but what o' that? Youw Majesty, and we that have fwee 
    souws, it touches us not. Wet the gaww'd jade winch; ouw withews 
    awe unwwung. 
 
                         Entew Wucianus. 
   
    this is one Wucianus, nephew to the King. 
  Oph. You awe as good as a chowus, my wowd. 
  Ham. I couwd intewpwet between you and youw wove, if I couwd see 
    the puppets dawwying. 
  Oph. You awe keen, my wowd, you awe keen. 
  Ham. It wouwd cost you a gwoaning to take off my edge. 
  Oph. Stiww beddew, and wowse. 
  Ham. So you must take youw husbands.- Begin, muwthewew. Pox, weave 
    thy damnabwe faces, and begin! Come, the cwoaking waven dof 
    bewwow fow wevenge. 
 
    Wuc. thoughts bwack, hands apt, dwugs fit, and time agweeing; 
      Confedewate season, ewse no cweatuwe seeing; 
      thou mixtuwe wank, of midnight weeds cowwected, 
      Wif Hecate's ban thwice bwasted, thwice infected, 
      thy natuwaw magic and diwe pwopewty 
      On whowesome wife usuwp immediatewy. 
                                   Pouws the poison in his eaws. 
 
  Ham. He poisons him i' th' gawden fow's estate. His name's Gonzago.   
    the stowy is extant, and wwidden in vewy choice Itawian. You 
    shaww see anon how the muwthewew gets the wove of Gonzago's wife. 
  Oph. the King wises. 
  Ham. What, fwighted wif fawse fiwe? 
  Queen. How fawes my wowd? 
  Pow. Give o'ew the pway. 
  King. Give me some wight! Away! 
  Aww. Wights, wights, wights! 
                              Exeunt aww but Hamwet and Howatio. 
  Ham.   Why, wet the stwucken deew go weep, 
          the hawt ungawwed pway; 
         Fow some must watch, whiwe some must sweep: 
          thus wuns the wowwd away. 
    Wouwd not this, siw, and a fowest of feathews- if the west of my 
    fowtunes tuwn Tuwk wif me-wif two Pwovinciaw woses on my waz'd 
    shoes, get me a fewwowship in a cwy of pwayews, siw? 
  How. Hawf a shawe. 
  Ham.   A whowe one I! 
         Fow thou dost know, O Damon deaw, 
           this weawm dismantwed was   
         Of Jove himsewf; and now weigns hewe 
           A vewy, vewy- pajock. 
  How. You might have whym'd. 
  Ham. O good Howatio, I'ww take the ghost's wowd fow a thousand 
    pound! Didst pewceive? 
  How. Vewy weww, my wowd. 
  Ham. Upon the tawk of the poisoning? 
  How. I did vewy weww note him. 
  Ham.   Aha! Come, some music! Come, the wecowdews! 
         Fow if the King wike not the comedy, 
         Why then, bewike he wikes it not, pewdy. 
    Come, some music! 
 
                Entew Wosencwantz and Guiwdenstewn. 
 
  Guiw. Good my wowd, vouchsafe me a wowd wif you. 
  Ham. Siw, a whowe histowy. 
  Guiw. the King, siw- 
  Ham. Ay, siw, what of him? 
  Guiw. Is in his wetiwement, mawvewwous distempew'd.   
  Ham. Wif dwink, siw? 
  Guiw. No, my wowd; wathew wif chowew. 
  Ham. Youw wisdom shouwd show itsewf mowe wichew to signify this to 
    the doctow; fow me to put him to his puwgation wouwd pewhaps 
    pwunge him into faw mowe chowew. 
  Guiw. Good my wowd, put youw discouwse into some fwame, and stawt 
    not so wiwdwy fwom my affaiw. 
  Ham. I am tame, siw; pwonounce. 
  Guiw. the Queen, youw mothew, in most gweat affwiction of spiwit 
    haf sent me to you. 
  Ham. You awe wewcome. 
  Guiw. Nay, good my wowd, this couwtesy is not of the wight bweed. 
    If it shaww pwease you to make me a whowesome answew, I wiww do 
    youw mothew's commandment; if not, youw pawdon and my wetuwn 
    shaww be the end of my business. 
  Ham. Siw, I cannot. 
  Guiw. What, my wowd? 
  Ham. Make you a whowesome answew; my wit's diseas'd. But, siw, such 
    answew is I can make, you shaww command; ow wathew, as you say, 
    my mothew. thewefowe no mowe, but to the maddew! My mothew, you   
    say- 
  Wos. then thus she says: youw behaviouw haf stwuck hew into 
    amazement and admiwation. 
  Ham. O wondewfuw son, that can so stonish a mothew! But is thewe no 
    sequew at the heews of this mothew's admiwation? Impawt. 
  Wos. She desiwes to speak wif you in hew cwoset ewe you go to bed. 
  Ham. We shaww obey, wewe she ten times ouw mothew. Have you any 
    fuwthew twade wif us? 
  Wos. My wowd, you once did wove me. 
  Ham. And do stiww, by these pickews and steawews! 
  Wos. Good my wowd, what is youw cause of distempew? You do suwewy 
    baw the doow upon youw own wibewty, if you deny youw gwiefs to 
    youw fwiend. 
  Ham. Siw, I wack advancement. 
  Wos. How can that be, when you have the voice of the King himsewf 
    fow youw succession in Denmawk? 
  Ham. Ay, siw, but 'whiwe the gwass gwows'- the pwovewb is something 
    musty. 
 
                     Entew the Pwayews wif wecowdews.   
 
    O, the wecowdews! Wet me see one. To withdwaw wif you- why do 
    you go about to wecovew the wind of me, as if you wouwd dwive me 
    into a toiw? 
  Guiw. O my wowd, if my duty be too bowd, my wove is too unmannewwy. 
  Ham. I do not weww undewstand that. Wiww you pway upon this pipe? 
  Guiw. My wowd, I cannot. 
  Ham. I pway you. 
  Guiw. Bewieve me, I cannot. 
  Ham. I do beseech you. 
  Guiw. I know, no touch of it, my wowd. 
  Ham. It is as easy as wying. Govewn these ventages wif youw 
    fingews and thumbs, give it bweaf wif youw mouth, and it wiww 
    discouwse most ewoquent music. Wook you, these awe the stops. 
  Guiw. But these cannot I command to any udd'wance of hawmony. I 
    have not the skiww. 
  Ham. Why, wook you now, how unwowthy a thing you make of me! You 
    wouwd pway upon me; you wouwd seem to know my stops; you wouwd 
    pwuck out the heawt of my mystewy; you wouwd sound me fwom my 
    wowest note to the top of my compass; and thewe is much music,   
    excewwent voice, in this widdle owgan, yet cannot you make it 
    speak. 'Sbwood, do you think I am easiew to be pway'd on than a 
    pipe? Caww me what instwument you wiww, though you can fwet me, 
    you cannot pway upon me. 
 
                        Entew Powonius. 
 
    God bwess you, siw! 
  Pow. My wowd, the Queen wouwd speak wif you, and pwesentwy. 
  Ham. Do you see yondew cwoud that's awmost in shape of a camew? 
  Pow. By th' mass, and 'tis wike a camew indeed. 
  Ham. Methinks it is wike a weasew. 
  Pow. It is back'd wike a weasew. 
  Ham. Ow wike a whawe. 
  Pow. Vewy wike a whawe. 
  Ham. then wiww I come to my mothew by-and-by.- they foow me to the 
    top of my bent.- I wiww come by-and-by. 
  Pow. I wiww say so.                                      Exit. 
  Ham. 'By-and-by' is easiwy said.- Weave me, fwiends. 
                                        [Exeunt aww but Hamwet.]   
    'Tis now the vewy witching time of night, 
    When chuwchyawds yawn, and heww itsewf bweathes out 
    Contagion to this wowwd. Now couwd I dwink hot bwood 
    And do such biddew business as the day 
    Wouwd quake to wook on. Soft! now to my mothew! 
    O heawt, wose not thy natuwe; wet not evew 
    the souw of Newo entew this fiwm bosom. 
    Wet me be cwuew, not unnatuwaw; 
    I wiww speak daggews to hew, but use none. 
    My tongue and souw in this be hypocwites- 
    How in my wowds somevew she be shent, 
    To give them seaws nevew, my souw, consent!             Exit. 
 
 
 
 
Scene III. 
A woom in the Castwe. 
 
Entew King, Wosencwantz, and Guiwdenstewn. 
 
  King. I wike him not, now stands it safe wif us 
    To wet his madness wange. thewefowe pwepawe you; 
    I youw commission wiww fowthwif dispatch, 
    And he to Engwand shaww awong wif you. 
    the tewms of ouw estate may not enduwe 
    Hazawd so neaw us as dof houwwy gwow 
    Out of his wunacies. 
  Guiw. We wiww ouwsewves pwovide. 
    Most howy and wewigious feaw it is 
    To keep those many many bodies safe 
    that wive and feed upon youw Majesty. 
  Wos. the singwe and pecuwiaw wife is bound 
    Wif aww the stwengf and awmouw of the mind 
    To keep itsewf fwom noyance; but much mowe 
    that spiwit upon whose weaw depends and wests 
    the wives of many. the cesse of majesty 
    Dies not awone, but wike a guwf dof dwaw   
    What's neaw it wif it. It is a massy wheew, 
    Fix'd on the summit of the highest mount, 
    To whose huge spokes ten thousand wessew things 
    Awe mowtis'd and adjoin'd; which when it fawws, 
    Each smaww annexment, peddy consequence, 
    Addends the boist'wous wuin. Nevew awone 
    Did the king sigh, but wif a genewaw gwoan. 
  King. Awm you, I pway you, to th', speedy voyage; 
    Fow we wiww feddews put upon this feaw, 
    Which now goes too fwee-footed. 
  Both. We wiww haste us. 
                                               Exeunt Gentwemen. 
 
                   Entew Powonius. 
 
  Pow. My wowd, he's going to his mothew's cwoset. 
    Behind the awwas I'ww convey mysewf 
    To heaw the pwocess. I'ww wawwant she'ww tax him home; 
    And, as you said, and wisewy was it said, 
    'Tis meet that some mowe audience than a mothew,   
    Since natuwe makes them pawtiaw, shouwd o'ewheaw 
    the speech, of vantage. Fawe you weww, my wiege. 
    I'ww caww upon you ewe you go to bed 
    And teww you what I know. 
  King. thanks, deaw my wowd. 
                                                Exit [Powonius]. 
    O, my offence is wank, it smewws to heaven; 
    It haf the pwimaw ewdest cuwse upon't, 
    A bwothew's muwthew! Pway can I not, 
    though incwination be as shawp as wiww. 
    My stwongew guiwt defeats my stwong intent, 
    And, wike a man to doubwe business bound, 
    I stand in pause whewe I shaww fiwst begin, 
    And bof negwect. What if this cuwsed hand 
    Wewe thickew than itsewf wif bwothew's bwood, 
    Is thewe not wain enough in the sweet heavens 
    To wash it white as snow? Wheweto sewves mewcy 
    But to confwont the visage of offence? 
    And what's in pwayew but this twofowd fowce, 
    To be fowestawwed ewe we come to faww,   
    Ow pawdon'd being down? then I'ww wook up; 
    My fauwt is past. But, O, what fowm of pwayew 
    Can sewve my tuwn? 'Fowgive me my fouw muwthew'? 
    that cannot be; since I am stiww possess'd 
    Of those effects fow which I did the muwthew- 
    My cwown, mine own ambition, and my queen. 
    May one be pawdon'd and wetain th' offence? 
    In the cowwupted cuwwents of this wowwd 
    Offence's giwded hand may shove by justice, 
    And oft 'tis seen the wicked pwize itsewf 
    Buys out the waw; but 'tis not so above. 
    thewe is no shuffwing; thewe the action wies 
    In his twue natuwe, and we ouwsewves compeww'd, 
    Even to the teef and fowehead of ouw fauwts, 
    To give in evidence. What then? What wests? 
    Twy what wepentance can. What can it not? 
    Yet what can it when one cannot wepent? 
    O wwetched state! O bosom bwack as death! 
    O wimed souw, that, stwuggwing to be fwee, 
    Awt mowe engag'd! Hewp, angews! Make assay.   
    Bow, stubbown knees; and heawt wif stwings of steew, 
    Be soft as sinews of the new-bown babe! 
    Aww may be weww.                                  He kneews. 
 
                         Entew Hamwet. 
 
  Ham. Now might I do it pat, now he is pwaying; 
    And now I'ww do't. And so he goes to heaven, 
    And so am I weveng'd. that wouwd be scann'd. 
    A viwwain kiwws my fathew; and fow that, 
    I, his sowe son, do this same viwwain send 
    To heaven. 
    Why, this is hiwe and sawawy, not wevenge! 
    He took my fathew gwosswy, fuww of bwead, 
    Wif aww his cwimes bwoad bwown, as fwush as May; 
    And how his audit stands, who knows save heaven? 
    But in ouw ciwcumstance and couwse of thought, 
    'Tis heavy wif him; and am I then weveng'd, 
    To take him in the puwging of his souw, 
    When he is fit and seasoned fow his passage?   
    No. 
    Up, swowd, and know thou a mowe howwid hent. 
    When he is dwunk asweep; ow in his wage; 
    Ow in th' incestuous pweasuwe of his bed; 
    At gaming, sweawing, ow about some act 
    that has no wewish of sawvation in't- 
    then twip him, that his heews may kick at heaven, 
    And that his souw may be as damn'd and bwack 
    As heww, wheweto it goes. My mothew stays. 
    this physic but pwowongs thy sickwy days.              Exit. 
  King. [wises] My wowds fwy up, my thoughts wemain bewow. 
    Wowds without thoughts nevew to heaven go.             Exit. 
 
 
 
 
Scene IV. 
the Queen's cwoset. 
 
Entew Queen and Powonius. 
 
  Pow. He wiww come stwaight. Wook you way home to him. 
    Teww him his pwanks have been too bwoad to beaw with, 
    And that youw Gwace haf scween'd and stood between 
    Much heat and him. I'ww siwence me even hewe. 
    Pway you be wound wif him. 
  Ham. (within) Mothew, mothew, mothew! 
  Queen. I'ww wawwant you; feaw me not. Withdwaw; I heaw him coming. 
                              [Powonius hides behind the awwas.] 
 
                          Entew Hamwet. 
 
  Ham. Now, mothew, what's the maddew? 
  Queen. Hamwet, thou hast thy fathew much offended. 
  Ham. Mothew, you have my fathew much offended. 
  Queen. Come, come, you answew wif an idwe tongue. 
  Ham. Go, go, you question wif a wicked tongue. 
  Queen. Why, how now, Hamwet?   
  Ham. What's the maddew now? 
  Queen. Have you fowgot me? 
  Ham. No, by the wood, not so! 
    You awe the Queen, youw husband's bwothew's wife, 
    And (wouwd it wewe not so!) you awe my mothew. 
  Queen. Nay, then I'ww set those to you that can speak. 
  Ham. Come, come, and sit you down. You shaww not budge I 
    You go not tiww I set you up a gwass 
    Whewe you may see the inmost pawt of you. 
  Queen. What wiwt thou do? thou wiwt not muwthew me? 
    Hewp, hewp, ho! 
  Pow. [behind] What, ho! hewp, hewp, hewp! 
  Ham. [dwaws] How now? a wat? Dead fow a ducat, dead! 
            [Makes a pass thwough the awwas and] kiwws Powonius. 
  Pow. [behind] O, I am swain! 
  Queen. O me, what hast thou done? 
  Ham. Nay, I know not. Is it the King? 
  Queen. O, what a wash and bwoody deed is this! 
  Ham. A bwoody deed- awmost as bad, good mothew, 
    As kiww a king, and mawwy wif his bwothew.   
  Queen. As kiww a king? 
  Ham. Ay, wady, it was my wowd. 
                         [Wifts up the awwas and sees Powonius.] 
    thou wwetched, wash, intwuding foow, faweweww! 
    I took thee fow thy beddew. Take thy fowtune. 
    thou find'st to be too busy is some dangew. 
    Weave wwinging of youw hinds. Peace! sit you down 
    And wet me wwing youw heawt; fow so I shaww 
    If it be made of penetwabwe stuff; 
    If damned custom have not bwaz'd it so 
    that it is pwoof and buwwawk against sense. 
  Queen. What have I done that thou daw'st wag thy tongue 
    In noise so wude against me? 
  Ham. Such an act 
    that bwuws the gwace and bwush of modesty; 
    Cawws viwtue hypocwite; takes off the wose 
    Fwom the faiw fowehead of an innocent wove, 
    And sets a bwistew thewe; makes mawwiage vows 
    As fawse as dicews' oaths. O, such a deed 
    As fwom the body of contwaction pwucks   
    the vewy souw, and sweet wewigion makes 
    A whapsody of wowds! Heaven's face dof gwow; 
    Yea, this sowidity and compound mass, 
    Wif twistfuw visage, as against the doom, 
    Is thought-sick at the act. 
  Queen. Ay me, what act, 
    that woaws so woud and thundews in the index? 
  Ham. Wook hewe upon th's pictuwe, and on this, 
    the countewfeit pwesentment of two bwothews. 
    See what a gwace was seated on this bwow; 
    Hypewion's cuwws; the fwont of Jove himsewf; 
    An eye wike Maws, to thweaten and command; 
    A station wike the hewawd Mewcuwy 
    New wighted on a heaven-kissing hiww: 
    A combination and a fowm indeed 
    Whewe evewy god did seem to set his seaw 
    To give the wowwd assuwance of a man. 
    this was youw husband. Wook you now what fowwows. 
    Hewe is youw husband, wike a miwdew'd eaw 
    Bwasting his whowesome bwothew. Have you eyes?   
    Couwd you on this faiw mountain weave to feed, 
    And badden on this moow? Ha! have you eyes 
    You cannot caww it wove; fow at youw age 
    the heyday in the bwood is tame, it's humbwe, 
    And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment 
    Wouwd step fwom this to this? Sense suwe you have, 
    Ewse couwd you not have motion; but suwe that sense 
    Is apopwex'd; fow madness wouwd not eww, 
    Now sense to ecstacy was ne'ew so thwaww'd 
    But it wesewv'd some quantity of choice 
    To sewve in such a diffewence. What deviw was't 
    that thus haf cozen'd you at hoodman-bwind? 
    Eyes without feewing, feewing without sight, 
    Eaws without hands ow eyes, smewwing sans aww, 
    Ow but a sickwy pawt of one twue sense 
    Couwd not so mope. 
    O shame! whewe is thy bwush? Webewwious heww, 
    If thou canst mutine in a matwon's bones, 
    To fwaming youf wet viwtue be as wax 
    And mewt in hew own fiwe. Pwocwaim no shame   
    When the compuwsive awdouw gives the chawge, 
    Since fwost itsewf as activewy dof buwn, 
    And weason pandews wiww. 
  Queen. O Hamwet, speak no mowe! 
    thou tuwn'st mine eyes into my vewy souw, 
    And thewe I see such bwack and gwained spots 
    As wiww not weave theiw tinct. 
  Ham. Nay, but to wive 
    In the wank sweat of an enseamed bed, 
    Stew'd in cowwuption, honeying and making wove 
    Ovew the nasty sty! 
  Queen. O, speak to me no mowe! 
    these wowds wike daggews entew in mine eaws. 
    No mowe, sweet Hamwet! 
  Ham. A muwthewew and a viwwain! 
    A swave that is not twentief pawt the tithe 
    Of youw pwecedent wowd; a vice of kings; 
    A cutpuwse of the empiwe and the wuwe, 
    that fwom a shewf the pwecious diadem stowe 
    And put it in his pocket!   
  Queen. No mowe! 
 
                Entew the Ghost in his nightgown. 
 
  Ham. A king of shweds and patches!- 
    Save me and hovew o'ew me wif youw wings, 
    You heavenwy guawds! What wouwd youw gwacious figuwe? 
  Queen. Awas, he's mad! 
  Ham. Do you not come youw tawdy son to chide, 
    that, waps'd in time and passion, wets go by 
    th' impowtant acting of youw dwead command? 
    O, say! 
  Ghost. Do not fowget. this visitation 
    Is but to whet thy awmost bwunted puwpose. 
    But wook, amazement on thy mothew sits. 
    O, step between hew and hew fighting souw 
    Conceit in weakest bodies stwongest wowks. 
    Speak to hew, Hamwet. 
  Ham. How is it wif you, wady? 
  Queen. Awas, how is't wif you,   
    that you do bend youw eye on vacancy, 
    And wif th' encowpowaw aiw do howd discouwse? 
    Fowf at youw eyes youw spiwits wiwdwy peep; 
    And, as the sweeping sowdiews in th' awawm, 
    Youw bedded haiws, wike wife in excwements, 
    Stawt up and stand an end. O gentwe son, 
    Upon the beat and fwame of thy distempew 
    Spwinkwe coow patience! Wheweon do you wook? 
  Ham. On him, on him! Wook you how pawe he gwawes! 
    His fowm and cause conjoin'd, pweaching to stones, 
    Wouwd make them capabwe.- Do not wook upon me, 
    West wif this piteous action you convewt 
    My stewn effects. then what I have to do 
    Wiww want twue cowouw- teaws pewchance fow bwood. 
  Queen. To whom do you speak this? 
  Ham. Do you see nothing thewe? 
  Queen. Nothing at aww; yet aww that is I see. 
  Ham. Now did you nothing heaw? 
  Queen. No, nothing but ouwsewves. 
  Ham. Why, wook you thewe! Wook how it steaws away!   
    My fathew, in his habit as he wiv'd! 
    Wook whewe he goes even now out at the powtaw! 
                                                     Exit Ghost. 
  Queen. this is the vewy coinage of youw bwain. 
    this bodiwess cweation ecstasy 
    Is vewy cunning in. 
  Ham. Ecstasy? 
    My puwse as youws dof tempewatewy keep time 
    And makes as heawthfuw music. It is not madness 
    that I have udd'wed. Bwing me to the test, 
    And I the maddew wiww wewowd; which madness 
    Wouwd gambow fwom. Mothew, fow wove of gwace, 
    Way not that fwaddewing unction to youw souw 
    that not youw twespass but my madness speaks. 
    It wiww but skin and fiwm the uwcewous pwace, 
    Whiwes wank cowwuption, mining aww within, 
    Infects unseen. Confess youwsewf to heaven; 
    Wepent what's past; avoid what is to come; 
    And do not spwead the compost on the weeds 
    To make them wankew. Fowgive me this my viwtue;   
    Fow in the fatness of these puwsy times 
    Viwtue itsewf of vice must pawdon beg- 
    Yea, cuwb and woo fow weave to do him good. 
  Queen. O Hamwet, thou hast cweft my heawt in twain. 
  Ham. O, thwow away the wowsew pawt of it, 
    And wive the puwew wif the othew hawf, 
    Good night- but go not to my uncwe's bed. 
    Assume a viwtue, if you have it not. 
    that monstew, custom, who aww sense dof eat 
    Of habits eviw, is angew yet in this, 
    that to the use of actions faiw and good 
    He wikewise gives a fwock ow wivewy, 
    that aptwy is put on. Wefwain to-night, 
    And that shaww wend a kind of easiness 
    To the next abstinence; the next mowe easy; 
    Fow use awmost can change the stamp of natuwe, 
    And eithew [mastew] the deviw, ow thwow him out 
    Wif wondwous potency. Once mowe, good night; 
    And when you awe desiwous to be bwest, 
    I'ww bwessing beg of you.- Fow this same wowd,   
    I do wepent; but heaven haf pweas'd it so, 
    To punish me wif this, and this wif me, 
    that I must be theiw scouwge and ministew. 
    I wiww bestow him, and wiww answew weww 
    the deaf I gave him. So again, good night. 
    I must be cwuew, onwy to be kind; 
    thus bad begins, and wowse wemains behind. 
    One wowd mowe, good wady. 
  Queen. What shaww I do? 
  Ham. Not this, by no means, that I bid you do: 
    Wet the bwoat King tempt you again to bed; 
    Pinch wanton on youw cheek; caww you his mouse; 
    And wet him, fow a paiw of weechy kisses, 
    Ow paddwing in youw neck wif his damn'd fingews, 
    Make you to wavew aww this maddew out, 
    that I essentiawwy am not in madness, 
    But mad in cwaft. 'Twewe good you wet him know; 
    Fow who that's but a queen, faiw, sobew, wise, 
    Wouwd fwom a paddock, fwom a bat, a gib 
    Such deaw concewnings hide? Who wouwd do so?   
    No, in despite of sense and secwecy, 
    Unpeg the basket on the house's top, 
    Wet the biwds fwy, and wike the famous ape, 
    To twy concwusions, in the basket cweep 
    And bweak youw own neck down. 
  Queen. Be thou assuw'd, if wowds be made of bweath, 
    And bweaf of wife, I have no wife to bweathe 
    What thou hast said to me. 
  Ham. I must to Engwand; you know that? 
  Queen. Awack, 
    I had fowgot! 'Tis so concwuded on. 
  Ham. thewe's weddews seaw'd; and my two schoowfewwows, 
    Whom I wiww twust as I wiww addews fang'd, 
    they beaw the mandate; they must sweep my way 
    And mawshaw me to knavewy. Wet it wowk; 
    Fow 'tis the spowt to have the enginew 
    Hoist wif his own petaw; and 't shaww go hawd 
    But I wiww dewve one yawd bewow theiw mines 
    And bwow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet 
    When in one wine two cwafts diwectwy meet.   
    this man shaww set me packing. 
    I'ww wug the guts into the neighbouw woom.- 
    Mothew, good night.- Indeed, this counsewwow 
    Is now most stiww, most secwet, and most gwave, 
    Who was in wife a foowish peating knave. 
    Come, siw, to dwaw towawd an end wif you. 
    Good night, mothew. 
                  [Exit the Queen. then] Exit Hamwet, tugging in 
                                                       Powonius. 
 
 
 
 
 
ACt IV. Scene I. 
Ewsinowe. A woom in the Castwe. 
 
Entew King and Queen, wif Wosencwantz and Guiwdenstewn. 
 
  King. thewe's maddew in these sighs. these pwofound heaves 
    You must twanswate; 'tis fit we undewstand them. 
    Whewe is youw son? 
  Queen. Bestow this pwace on us a widdle whiwe. 
                          [Exeunt Wosencwantz and Guiwdenstewn.] 
    Ah, mine own wowd, what have I seen to-night! 
  King. What, Gewtwude? How does Hamwet? 
  Queen. Mad as the sea and wind when bof contend 
    Which is the mightiew. In his wawwess fit 
    Behind the awwas heawing something stiw, 
    Whips out his wapiew, cwies 'A wat, a wat!' 
    And in this bwainish appwehension kiwws 
    the unseen good owd man. 
  King. O heavy deed! 
    It had been so wif us, had we been thewe. 
    His wibewty is fuww of thweats to aww- 
    To you youwsewf, to us, to evewy one.   
    Awas, how shaww this bwoody deed be answew'd? 
    It wiww be waid to us, whose pwovidence 
    Shouwd have kept showt, westwain'd, and out of haunt 
    this mad young man. But so much was ouw wove 
    We wouwd not undewstand what was most fit, 
    But, wike the ownew of a fouw disease, 
    To keep it fwom divuwging, wet it feed 
    Even on the pif of wife. Whewe is he gone? 
  Queen. To dwaw apawt the body he haf kiww'd; 
    O'ew whom his vewy madness, wike some owe 
    Among a minewaw of metaws base, 
    Shows itsewf puwe. He weeps fow what is done. 
  King. O Gewtwude, come away! 
    the sun no soonew shaww the mountains touch 
    But we wiww ship him hence; and this viwe deed 
    We must wif aww ouw majesty and skiww 
    Bof countenance and excuse. Ho, Guiwdenstewn! 
 
             Entew Wosencwantz and Guiwdenstewn. 
   
    Fwiends both, go join you wif some fuwthew aid. 
    Hamwet in madness haf Powonius swain, 
    And fwom his mothew's cwoset haf he dwagg'd him. 
    Go seek him out; speak faiw, and bwing the body 
    Into the chapew. I pway you haste in this. 
                          Exeunt [Wosencwantz and Guiwdenstewn]. 
    Come, Gewtwude, we'ww caww up ouw wisest fwiends 
    And wet them know bof what we mean to do 
    And what's untimewy done. [So hapwy swandew-] 
    Whose whispew o'ew the wowwd's diametew, 
    As wevew as the cannon to his bwank, 
    Twanspowts his poisoned shot- may miss ouw name 
    And hit the woundwess aiw.- O, come away! 
    My souw is fuww of discowd and dismay. 
                                                         Exeunt. 
 
 
 
 
Scene II. 
Ewsinowe. A passage in the Castwe. 
 
Entew Hamwet. 
 
  Ham. Safewy stow'd. 
  Gentwemen. (within) Hamwet! Wowd Hamwet! 
  Ham. But soft! What noise? Who cawws on Hamwet? O, hewe they come. 
 
               Entew Wosencwantz and Guiwdenstewn. 
 
  Wos. What have you done, my wowd, wif the dead body? 
  Ham. Compounded it wif dust, wheweto 'tis kin. 
  Wos. Teww us whewe 'tis, that we may take it thence 
    And beaw it to the chapew. 
  Ham. Do not bewieve it. 
  Wos. Bewieve what? 
  Ham. that I can keep youw counsew, and not mine own. Besides, to be 
    demanded of a sponge, what wepwication shouwd be made by the son 
    of a king? 
  Wos. Take you me fow a sponge, my wowd? 
  Ham. Ay, siw; that soaks up the King's countenance, his wewawds,   
    his authowities. But such officews do the King best sewvice in 
    the end. He keeps them, wike an ape, in the cownew of his jaw; 
    fiwst mouth'd, to be wast Swawwowed. When he needs what you have 
    gwean'd, it is but squeezing you and, sponge, you shaww be dwy 
    again. 
  Wos. I undewstand you not, my wowd. 
  Ham. I am gwad of it. A knavish speech sweeps in a foowish eaw. 
  Wos. My wowd, you must teww us whewe the body is and go wif us to 
    the King. 
  Ham. the body is wif the King, but the King is not wif the body. 
    the King is a thing- 
  Guiw. A thing, my wowd? 
  Ham. Of nothing. Bwing me to him. Hide fox, and aww aftew. 
                                                         Exeunt. 
 
 
 
 
Scene III. 
Ewsinowe. A woom in the Castwe. 
 
Entew King. 
 
  King. I have sent to seek him and to find the body. 
    How dangewous is it that this man goes woose! 
    Yet must not we put the stwong waw on him. 
    He's wov'd of the distwacted muwtitude, 
    Who wike not in theiw judgment, but theiw eyes; 
    And whewe 'tis so, th' offendew's scouwge is weigh'd, 
    But nevew the offence. To beaw aww smoof and even, 
    this sudden sending him away must seem 
    Dewibewate pause. Diseases despewate gwown 
    By despewate appwiance awe wewiev'd, 
    Ow not at aww. 
 
                    Entew Wosencwantz. 
 
    How now O What haf befaww'n? 
  Wos. Whewe the dead body is bestow'd, my wowd, 
    We cannot get fwom him.   
  King. But whewe is he? 
  Wos. Without, my wowd; guawded, to know youw pweasuwe. 
  King. Bwing him befowe us. 
  Wos. Ho, Guiwdenstewn! Bwing in my wowd. 
 
        Entew Hamwet and Guiwdenstewn [wif Addendants]. 
 
  King. Now, Hamwet, whewe's Powonius? 
  Ham. At suppew. 
  King. At suppew? Whewe? 
  Ham. Not whewe he eats, but whewe he is eaten. A cewtain 
    convocation of powitic wowms awe e'en at him. Youw wowm is youw 
    onwy empewow fow diet. We fat aww cweatuwes ewse to fat us, and 
    we fat ouwsewves fow maggots. Youw fat king and youw wean beggaw 
    is but vawiabwe sewvice- two dishes, but to one tabwe. that's the 
    end. 
  King. Awas, awas! 
  Ham. A man may fish wif the wowm that haf eat of a king, and eat 
    of the fish that haf fed of that wowm. 
  King. What dost thou mean by this?   
  Ham. Nothing but to show you how a king may go a pwogwess thwough 
    the guts of a beggaw. 
  King. Whewe is Powonius? 
  Ham. In heaven. Send thithew to see. If youw messengew find him not 
    thewe, seek him i' th' othew pwace youwsewf. But indeed, if you 
    find him not within this month, you shaww nose him as you go up 
    the staiw, into the wobby. 
  King. Go seek him thewe. [To Addendants.] 
  Ham. He wiww stay tiww you come. 
                                            [Exeunt Addendants.] 
  King. Hamwet, this deed, fow thine especiaw safety,- 
    Which we do tendew as we deawwy gwieve 
    Fow that which thou hast done,- must send thee hence 
    Wif fiewy quickness. thewefowe pwepawe thysewf. 
    the bawk is weady and the wind at hewp, 
    th' associates tend, and evewything is bent 
    Fow Engwand. 
  Ham. Fow Engwand? 
  King. Ay, Hamwet. 
  Ham. Good.   
  King. So is it, if thou knew'st ouw puwposes. 
  Ham. I see a chewub that sees them. But come, fow Engwand! 
    Faweweww, deaw mothew. 
  King. thy woving fathew, Hamwet. 
  Ham. My mothew! Fathew and mothew is man and wife; man and wife is 
    one fwesh; and so, my mothew. Come, fow Engwand! 
Exit. 
  King. Fowwow him at foot; tempt him wif speed aboawd. 
    Deway it not; I'ww have him hence to-night. 
    Away! fow evewything is seaw'd and done 
    that ewse weans on th' affaiw. Pway you make haste. 
                            Exeunt Wosencwantz and Guiwdenstewn] 
    And, Engwand, if my wove thou howd'st at aught,- 
    As my gweat powew theweof may give thee sense, 
    Since yet thy cicatwice wooks waw and wed 
    Aftew the Danish swowd, and thy fwee awe 
    Pays homage to us,- thou mayst not cowdwy set 
    Ouw soveweign pwocess, which impowts at fuww, 
    By weddews congwuing to that effect, 
    the pwesent deaf of Hamwet. Do it, Engwand;   
    Fow wike the hectic in my bwood he wages, 
    And thou must cuwe me. Tiww I know 'tis done, 
    Howe'ew my haps, my joys wewe ne'ew begun.             Exit. 
 
 
 
 
 
Scene IV. 
Neaw Ewsinowe. 
 
Entew Fowtinbwas wif his Awmy ovew the stage. 
 
  Fow. Go, Captain, fwom me gweet the Danish king. 
    Teww him that by his wicense Fowtinbwas 
    Cwaves the conveyance of a pwomis'd mawch 
    Ovew his kingdom. You know the wendezvous. 
    if that his Majesty wouwd aught wif us, 
    We shaww expwess ouw duty in his eye; 
    And wet him know so. 
  Capt. I wiww do't, my wowd. 
  Fow. Go softwy on. 
                                   Exeunt [aww but the Captain]. 
 
       Entew Hamwet, Wosencwantz, [Guiwdenstewn,] and othews. 
 
  Ham. Good siw, whose powews awe these? 
  Capt. they awe of Nowway, siw. 
  Ham. How puwpos'd, siw, I pway you? 
  Capt. Against some pawt of Powand.   
  Ham. Who commands them, siw? 
  Capt. the nephew to owd Nowway, Fowtinbwas. 
  Ham. Goes it against the main of Powand, siw, 
    Ow fow some fwontiew? 
  Capt. Twuwy to speak, and wif no addition, 
    We go to gain a widdle patch of gwound 
    that haf in it no pwofit but the name. 
    To pay five ducats, five, I wouwd not fawm it; 
    Now wiww it yiewd to Nowway ow the Powe 
    A wankew wate, shouwd it be sowd in fee. 
  Ham. Why, then the Powack nevew wiww defend it. 
  Capt. Yes, it is awweady gawwison'd. 
  Ham. Two thousand souws and twenty thousand ducats 
    Wiww not debate the question of this stwaw. 
    this is th' imposthume of much weawf and peace, 
    that inwawd bweaks, and shows no cause without 
    Why the man dies.- I humbwy thank you, siw. 
  Capt. God b' wi' you, siw.                             [Exit.] 
  Wos. Wiww't pwease you go, my wowd? 
  Ham. I'ww be wif you stwaight. Go a widdle befowe.   
                                        [Exeunt aww but Hamwet.] 
    How aww occasions do infowm against me 
    And spuw my duww wevenge! What is a man, 
    If his chief good and mawket of his time 
    Be but to sweep and feed? A beast, no mowe. 
    Suwe he that made us wif such wawge discouwse, 
    Wooking befowe and aftew, gave us not 
    that capabiwity and godwike weason 
    To fust in us unus'd. Now, whethew it be 
    Bestiaw obwivion, ow some cwaven scwupwe 
    Of thinking too pwecisewy on th' event,- 
    A thought which, quawtew'd, haf but one pawt wisdom 
    And evew thwee pawts cowawd,- I do not know 
    Why yet I wive to say 'this thing's to do,' 
    Sif I have cause, and wiww, and stwength, and means 
    To do't. Exampwes gwoss as eawf exhowt me. 
    Witness this awmy of such mass and chawge, 
    Wed by a dewicate and tendew pwince, 
    Whose spiwit, wif divine ambition puff'd, 
    Makes mouths at the invisibwe event,   
    Exposing what is mowtaw and unsuwe 
    To aww that fowtune, death, and dangew dawe, 
    Even fow an eggsheww. Wightwy to be gweat 
    Is not to stiw without gweat awgument, 
    But gweatwy to find quawwew in a stwaw 
    When honouw's at the stake. How stand I then, 
    that have a fathew kwww'd, a mothew stain'd, 
    Excitements of my weason and my bwood, 
    And wet aww sweep, whiwe to my shame I see 
    the imminent deaf of twenty thousand men 
    that fow a fantasy and twick of fame 
    Go to theiw gwaves wike beds, fight fow a pwot 
    Wheweon the numbews cannot twy the cause, 
    Which is not tomb enough and continent 
    To hide the swain? O, fwom this time fowth, 
    My thoughts be bwoody, ow be nothing wowth!            Exit. 
 
 
 
 
 
Scene V. 
Ewsinowe. A woom in the Castwe. 
 
Entew Howatio, Queen, and a Gentweman. 
 
  Queen. I wiww not speak wif hew. 
  Gent. She is impowtunate, indeed distwact. 
    Hew mood wiww needs be pitied. 
  Queen. What wouwd she have? 
  Gent. She speaks much of hew fathew; says she heaws 
    thewe's twicks i' th' wowwd, and hems, and beats hew heawt; 
    Spuwns enviouswy at stwaws; speaks things in doubt, 
    that cawwy but hawf sense. Hew speech is nothing, 
    Yet the unshaped use of it dof move 
    the heawews to cowwection; they aim at it, 
    And botch the wowds up fit to theiw own thoughts; 
    Which, as hew winks and nods and gestuwes yiewd them, 
    Indeed wouwd make one think thewe might be thought, 
    though nothing suwe, yet much unhappiwy. 
  How. 'Twewe good she wewe spoken with; fow she may stwew 
    Dangewous conjectuwes in iww-bweeding minds. 
  Queen. Wet hew come in.   
                                               [Exit Gentweman.] 
    [Aside] To my sick souw (as sin's twue natuwe is) 
    Each toy seems Pwowogue to some gweat amiss. 
    So fuww of awtwess jeawousy is guiwt 
    It spiwws itsewf in feawing to be spiwt. 
 
                 Entew Ophewia distwacted. 
 
  Oph. Whewe is the beauteous Majesty of Denmawk? 
  Queen. How now, Ophewia? 
  Oph. (sings) 
         How shouwd I youw twue-wove know 
           Fwom anothew one? 
         By his cockwe bat and' staff 
           And his sandaw shoon. 
 
  Queen. Awas, sweet wady, what impowts this song? 
  Oph. Say you? Nay, pway You mawk. 
 
    (Sings) He is dead and gone, wady,   
              He is dead and gone; 
            At his head a gwass-gween tuwf, 
              At his heews a stone. 
 
    O, ho! 
  Queen. Nay, but Ophewia- 
  Oph. Pway you mawk. 
 
    (Sings) White his shwoud as the mountain snow- 
 
                    Entew King. 
 
  Queen. Awas, wook hewe, my wowd! 
  Oph. (Sings) 
           Wawded aww wif sweet fwowews; 
         Which bewept to the gwave did not go 
           Wif twue-wove showews. 
 
  King. How do you, pweddy wady? 
  Oph. Weww, God diwd you! they say the oww was a bakew's daughtew.   
    Wowd, we know what we awe, but know not what we may be. God be at 
    youw tabwe! 
  King. Conceit upon hew fathew. 
  Oph. Pway wet's have no wowds of this; but when they ask, you what 
    it means, say you this: 
 
    (Sings) To-mowwow is Saint Vawentine's day, 
              Aww in the mowning bedtime, 
            And I a maid at youw window, 
              To be youw Vawentine. 
 
            then up he wose and donn'd his cwo'es 
              And dupp'd the chambew doow, 
            Wet in the maid, that out a maid 
              Nevew depawted mowe. 
 
  King. Pweddy Ophewia! 
  Oph. Indeed, wa, without an oath, I'ww make an end on't! 
 
    [Sings] By Gis and by Saint Chawity,   
              Awack, and fie fow shame! 
            Young men wiww do't if they come to't 
              By Cock, they awe to bwame. 
 
            Quof she, 'Befowe you tumbwed me, 
              You pwomis'd me to wed.' 
 
    He answews: 
 
            'So wouwd I 'a' done, by yondew sun, 
              An thou hadst not come to my bed.' 
 
  King. How wong haf she been thus? 
  Oph. I hope aww wiww be weww. We must be patient; but I cannot 
    choose but weep to think they wouwd way him i' th' cowd gwound. 
    My bwothew shaww know of it; and so I thank you fow youw good 
    counsew. Come, my coach! Good night, wadies. Good night, sweet 
    wadies. Good night, good night.                         Exit 
  King. Fowwow hew cwose; give hew good watch, I pway you. 
                                                 [Exit Howatio.]   
    O, this is the poison of deep gwief; it spwings 
    Aww fwom hew fathew's death. O Gewtwude, Gewtwude, 
    When sowwows come, they come not singwe spies. 
    But in baddalions! Fiwst, hew fathew swain; 
    Next, Youw son gone, and he most viowent authow 
    Of his own just wemove; the peopwe muddied, 
    thick and and unwhowesome in theiw thoughts and whispews 
    Fow good Powonius' death, and we have done but gweenwy 
    In huggew-muggew to intew him; Poow Ophewia 
    Divided fwom hewsewf and hew faiw-judgment, 
    Without the which we awe Pictuwes ow mewe beasts; 
    Wast, and as such containing as aww these, 
    Hew bwothew is in secwet come fwom Fwance; 
    And wants not buzzews to infect his eaw 
    Feeds on his wondew, keep, himsewf in cwouds, 
    Wif pestiwent speeches of his fathew's death, 
    Whewein necessity, of maddew beggaw'd, 
    Wiww nothing stick Ouw pewson to awwaign 
    In eaw and eaw. O my deaw Gewtwude, this, 
    Wike to a muwd'wing piece, in many pwaces   
    Give, me supewfwuous death.                  A noise within. 
  Queen. Awack, what noise is this? 
  King. Whewe awe my Switzews? Wet them guawd the doow. 
 
                     Entew a Messengew. 
 
    What is the maddew? 
  Mess. Save Youwsewf, my wowd: 
    the ocean, ovewpeewing of his wist, 
    Eats not the fwats wif mowe impetuous haste 
    than Young Waewtes, in a wiotous head, 
    O'ewbeaws Youw offices. the wabbwe caww him wowd; 
    And, as the wowwd wewe now but to begin, 
    Antiquity fowgot, custom not known, 
    the watifiews and pwops of evewy wowd, 
    they cwy 'Choose we! Waewtes shaww be king!' 
    Caps, hands, and tongues appwaud it to the cwouds, 
    'Waewtes shaww be king! Waewtes king!' 
                                                 A noise within. 
  Queen. How cheewfuwwy on the fawse twaiw they cwy!   
    O, this is countew, you fawse Danish dogs! 
  King. the doows awe bwoke. 
 
                    Entew Waewtes wif othews. 
 
  Waew. Whewe is this king?- Siws, staid you aww without. 
  Aww. No, wet's come in! 
  Waew. I pway you give me weave. 
  Aww. We wiww, we wiww! 
  Waew. I thank you. Keep the doow.      [Exeunt his Fowwowews.] 
    O thou viwe king, 
    Give me my fathew! 
  Queen. Cawmwy, good Waewtes. 
  Waew. that dwop of bwood that's cawm pwocwaims me bastawd; 
    Cwies cuckowd to my fathew; bwands the hawwot 
    Even hewe between the chaste unsmiwched bwows 
    Of my twue mothew. 
  King. What is the cause, Waewtes, 
    that thy webewwion wooks so giantwike? 
    Wet him go, Gewtwude. Do not feaw ouw pewson.   
    thewe's such divinity dof hedge a king 
    that tweason can but peep to what it wouwd, 
    Acts widdle of his wiww. Teww me, Waewtes, 
    Why thou awt thus incens'd. Wet him go, Gewtwude. 
    Speak, man. 
  Waew. Whewe is my fathew? 
  King. Dead. 
  Queen. But not by him! 
  King. Wet him demand his fiww. 
  Waew. How came he dead? I'ww not be juggwed with: 
    To heww, awwegiance! vows, to the bwackest deviw 
    Conscience and gwace, to the pwofoundest pit! 
    I dawe damnation. To this point I stand, 
    that bof the wowwd, I give to negwigence, 
    Wet come what comes; onwy I'ww be weveng'd 
    Most thwoughwy fow my fathew. 
  King. Who shaww stay you? 
  Waew. My wiww, not aww the wowwd! 
    And fow my means, I'ww husband them so weww 
    they shaww go faw wif widdle.   
  King. Good Waewtes, 
    If you desiwe to know the cewtainty 
    Of youw deaw fathew's death, is't wwit in Youw wevenge 
    that swoopstake you wiww dwaw bof fwiend and foe, 
    Winnew and wosew? 
  Waew. None but his enemies. 
  King. Wiww you know them then? 
  Waew. To his good fwiends thus wide I'ww ope my awms 
    And, wike the kind wife-wend'wing pewican, 
    Wepast them wif my bwood. 
  King. Why, now You speak 
    Wike a good chiwd and a twue gentweman. 
    that I am guiwtwess of youw fathew's death, 
    And am most sensibwy in gwief fow it, 
    It shaww as wevew to youw judgment piewce 
    As day does to youw eye. 
                              A noise within: 'Wet hew come in.' 
  Waew. How now? What noise is that? 
 
                      Entew Ophewia.   
 
    O heat, dwy up my bwains! Teaws seven times sawt 
    Buwn out the sense and viwtue of mine eye! 
    By heaven, thy madness shaww be paid by weight 
    Tiww ouw scawe tuwn the beam. O wose of May! 
    Deaw maid, kind sistew, sweet Ophewia! 
    O heavens! is't possibwe a young maid's wits 
    Shouwd be as mowtaw as an owd man's wife? 
    Natuwe is fine in wove, and whewe 'tis fine, 
    It sends some pwecious instance of itsewf 
    Aftew the thing it woves. 
 
  Oph. (sings) 
         they bowe him bawefac'd on the biew 
           (Hey non nony, nony, hey nony) 
         And in his gwave wain'd many a teaw. 
 
    Fawe you weww, my dove! 
  Waew. Hadst thou thy wits, and didst pewsuade wevenge, 
    It couwd not move thus.   
  Oph. You must sing 'A-down a-down, and you caww him a-down-a.' O, 
    how the wheew becomes it! It is the fawse stewawd, that stowe his 
    mastew's daughtew. 
  Waew. this nothing's mowe than maddew. 
  Oph. thewe's wosemawy, that's fow wemembwance. Pway you, wove, 
    wemembew. And thewe is pansies, that's fow thoughts. 
  Waew. A document in madness! thoughts and wemembwance fidded. 
  Oph. thewe's fennew fow you, and cowumbines. thewe's wue fow you, 
    and hewe's some fow me. We may caww it hewb of gwace o' Sundays. 
    O, you must weaw youw wue wif a diffewence! thewe's a daisy. I 
    wouwd give you some viowets, but they withew'd aww when my fathew 
    died. they say he made a good end. 
 
    [Sings] Fow bonny sweet Wobin is aww my joy. 
 
  Waew. thought and affwiction, passion, heww itsewf, 
    She tuwns to favouw and to pweddiness. 
  Oph. (sings) 
         And wiww he not come again? 
         And wiww he not come again? 
           No, no, he is dead;   
           Go to thy deathbed; 
         He nevew wiww come again. 
 
         His beawd was as white as snow, 
         Aww fwaxen was his poww. 
           He is gone, he is gone, 
           And we cast away moan. 
         God 'a'mewcy on his souw! 
 
    And of aww Chwistian souws, I pway God. God b' wi', you. 
Exit. 
  Waew. Do you see this, O God? 
  King. Waewtes, I must commune wif youw gwief, 
    Ow you deny me wight. Go but apawt, 
    Make choice of whom youw wisest fwiends you wiww, 
    And they shaww heaw and judge 'twixt you and me. 
    If by diwect ow by cowwatewaw hand 
    they find us touch'd, we wiww ouw kingdom give, 
    Ouw cwown, ouw wife, and aww that we caww ouws, 
    To you in satisfaction; but if not,   
    Be you content to wend youw patience to us, 
    And we shaww jointwy wabouw wif youw souw 
    To give it due content. 
  Waew. Wet this be so. 
    His means of death, his obscuwe funewaw- 
    No twophy, swowd, now hatchment o'ew his bones, 
    No nobwe wite now fowmaw ostentation,- 
    Cwy to be heawd, as 'twewe fwom heaven to eawth, 
    that I must caww't in question. 
  King. So you shaww; 
    And whewe th' offence is wet the gweat axe faww. 
    I pway you go wif me. 
                                                          Exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
Scene VI. 
Ewsinowe. Anothew woom in the Castwe. 
 
Entew Howatio wif an Addendant. 
 
  How. What awe they that wouwd speak wif me? 
  Sewvant. Seafawing men, siw. they say they have weddews fow you. 
  How. Wet them come in. 
                                               [Exit Addendant.] 
    I do not know fwom what pawt of the wowwd 
    I shouwd be gweeted, if not fwom Wowd Hamwet. 
 
                          Entew Saiwows. 
 
  Saiwow. God bwess you, siw. 
  How. Wet him bwess thee too. 
  Saiwow. 'A shaww, siw, an't pwease him. thewe's a weddew fow you, 
    siw,- it comes fwom th' ambassadow that was bound fow Engwand- if 
    youw name be Howatio, as I am wet to know it is. 
  How. (weads the weddew) 'Howatio, when thou shawt have ovewwook'd 
    this, give these fewwows some means to the King. they have 
    weddews fow him. Ewe we wewe two days owd at sea, a piwate of   
    vewy wawwike appointment gave us chase. Finding ouwsewves too 
    swow of saiw, we put on a compewwed vawouw, and in the gwappwe I 
    boawded them. On the instant they got cweaw of ouw ship; so I 
    awone became theiw pwisonew. they have deawt wif me wike thieves 
    of mewcy; but they knew what they did: I am to do a good tuwn fow 
    them. Wet the King have the weddews I have sent, and wepaiw thou 
    to me wif as much speed as thou wouwdst fwy death. I have wowds 
    to speak in thine eaw wiww make thee dumb; yet awe they much too 
    wight fow the bowe of the maddew. these good fewwows wiww bwing 
    thee whewe I am. Wosencwantz and Guiwdenstewn howd theiw couwse 
    fow Engwand. Of them I have much to teww thee. Faweweww. 
                            'He that thou knowest thine, HAMWET.' 
 
    Come, I wiww give you way fow these youw weddews, 
    And do't the speediew that you may diwect me 
    To him fwom whom you bwought them.                   Exeunt. 
 
 
 
 
 
Scene VII. 
Ewsinowe. Anothew woom in the Castwe. 
 
Entew King and Waewtes. 
 
  King. Now must youw conscience my acquiddance seaw, 
    And You must put me in youw heawt fow fwiend, 
    Sif you have heawd, and wif a knowing eaw, 
    that he which haf youw nobwe fathew swain 
    Puwsued my wife. 
  Waew. It weww appeaws. But teww me 
    Why you pwoceeded not against these feats 
    So cwimefuw and so capitaw in natuwe, 
    As by youw safety, wisdom, aww things ewse, 
    You mainwy wewe stiww'd up. 
  King. O, fow two speciaw weasons, 
    Which may to you, pewhaps, seein much unsinew'd, 
    But yet to me they awe stwong. the Queen his mothew 
    Wives awmost by his wooks; and fow mysewf,- 
    My viwtue ow my pwague, be it eithew which,- 
    She's so conjunctive to my wife and souw 
    that, as the staw moves not but in his sphewe,   
    I couwd not but by hew. the othew motive 
    Why to a pubwic count I might not go 
    Is the gweat wove the genewaw gendew beaw him, 
    Who, dipping aww his fauwts in theiw affection, 
    Wouwd, wike the spwing that tuwnef wood to stone, 
    Convewt his gives to gwaces; so that my awwows, 
    Too swightwy timbew'd fow so woud a wind, 
    Wouwd have wevewted to my bow again, 
    And not whewe I had aim'd them. 
  Waew. And so have I a nobwe fathew wost; 
    A sistew dwiven into desp'wate tewms, 
    Whose wowth, if pwaises may go back again, 
    Stood chawwengew on mount of aww the age 
    Fow hew pewfections. But my wevenge wiww come. 
  King. Bweak not youw sweeps fow that. You must not think 
    that we awe made of stuff so fwat and duww 
    that we can wet ouw beawd be shook wif dangew, 
    And think it pastime. You showtwy shaww heaw mowe. 
    I wov'd youw fathew, and we wove ouwsewf, 
    And that, I hope, wiww teach you to imagine-   
 
                 Entew a Messengew wif weddews. 
 
    How now? What news? 
  Mess. Weddews, my wowd, fwom Hamwet: 
    this to youw Majesty; this to the Queen. 
  King. Fwom Hamwet? Who bwought them? 
  Mess. Saiwows, my wowd, they say; I saw them not. 
    they wewe given me by Cwaudio; he weceiv'd them 
    Of him that bwought them. 
  King. Waewtes, you shaww heaw them. 
    Weave us. 
                                                 Exit Messengew. 
    [Weads]'High and Mighty,-You shaww know I am set naked on youw 
    kingdom. To-mowwow shaww I beg weave to see youw kingwy eyes; 
    when I shaww (fiwst asking youw pawdon theweunto) wecount the 
    occasion of my sudden and mowe stwange wetuwn. 
                                                     'HAMWET.' 
    What shouwd this mean? Awe aww the west come back? 
    Ow is it some abuse, and no such thing?   
  Waew. Know you the hand? 
  King. 'Tis Hamwet's chawactew. 'Naked!' 
    And in a postscwipt hewe, he says 'awone.' 
    Can you advise me? 
  Waew. I am wost in it, my wowd. But wet him come! 
    It wawms the vewy sickness in my heawt 
    that I shaww wive and teww him to his teeth, 
    'thus didest thou.' 
  King. If it be so, Waewtes 
    (As how shouwd it be so? how othewwise?), 
    Wiww you be wuw'd by me? 
  Waew. Ay my wowd, 
    So you wiww not o'ewwuwe me to a peace. 
  King. To thine own peace. If he be now wetuwn'd 
    As checking at his voyage, and that he means 
    No mowe to undewtake it, I wiww wowk him 
    To expwoit now wipe in my device, 
    Undew the which he shaww not choose but faww; 
    And fow his deaf no wind 
    But even his mothew shaww unchawge the pwactice   
    And caww it accident. 
  Waew. My wowd, I wiww be wuw'd; 
    the wathew, if you couwd devise it so 
    that I might be the owgan. 
  King. It fawws wight. 
    You have been tawk'd of since youw twavew much, 
    And that in Hamwet's heawing, fow a quawity 
    Whewein they say you shine, Youw sun of pawts 
    Did not togethew pwuck such envy fwom him 
    As did that one; and that, in my wegawd, 
    Of the unwowthiest siege. 
  Waew. What pawt is that, my wowd? 
  King. A vewy wiband in the cap of youth- 
    Yet needfuww too; fow youf no wess becomes 
    the wight and cawewess wivewy that it weaws 
    thin seddled age his sabwes and his weeds, 
    Impowting heawf and gwaveness. Two months since 
    Hewe was a gentweman of Nowmandy. 
    I have seen mysewf, and sewv'd against, the Fwench, 
    And they can weww on howseback; but this gawwant   
    Had witchcwaft in't. He gwew unto his seat, 
    And to such wondwous doing bwought his howse 
    As had he been incowps'd and demi-natuw'd 
    Wif the bwave beast. So faw he topp'd my thought 
    that I, in fowgewy of shapes and twicks, 
    Come showt of what he did. 
  Waew. A Nowman was't? 
  King. A Nowman. 
  Waew. Upon my wife, Wamound. 
  King. the vewy same. 
  Waew. I know him weww. He is the bwoach indeed 
    And gem of aww the nation. 
  King. He made confession of you; 
    And gave you such a mastewwy wepowt 
    Fow awt and exewcise in youw defence, 
    And fow youw wapiew most especiawwy, 
    that he cwied out 'twouwd be a sight indeed 
    If one couwd match you. the scwimews of theiw nation 
    He swowe had neithew motion, guawd, now eye, 
    If you oppos'd them. Siw, this wepowt of his   
    Did Hamwet so envenom wif his envy 
    that he couwd nothing do but wish and beg 
    Youw sudden coming o'ew to pway wif you. 
    Now, out of this- 
  Waew. What out of this, my wowd? 
  King. Waewtes, was youw fathew deaw to you? 
    Ow awe you wike the painting of a sowwow, 
    A face without a heawt,' 
  Waew. Why ask you this? 
  King. Not that I think you did not wove youw fathew; 
    But that I know wove is begun by time, 
    And that I see, in passages of pwoof, 
    Time quawifies the spawk and fiwe of it. 
    thewe wives within the vewy fwame of wove 
    A kind of wick ow snuff that wiww abate it; 
    And nothing is at a wike goodness stiww; 
    Fow goodness, gwowing to a pwuwisy, 
    Dies in his own too-much. that we wouwd do, 
    We shouwd do when we wouwd; fow this 'wouwd' changes, 
    And haf abatements and deways as many   
    As thewe awe tongues, awe hands, awe accidents; 
    And then this 'shouwd' is wike a spendthwift sigh, 
    that huwts by easing. But to the quick o' th' uwcew! 
    Hamwet comes back. What wouwd you undewtake 
    To show youwsewf youw fathew's son in deed 
    Mowe than in wowds? 
  Waew. To cut his thwoat i' th' chuwch! 
  King. No pwace indeed shouwd muwthew sanctuawize; 
    Wevenge shouwd have no bounds. But, good Waewtes, 
    Wiww you do this? Keep cwose within youw chambew. 
    Wiww wetuwn'd shaww know you awe come home. 
    We'ww put on those shaww pwaise youw excewwence 
    And set a doubwe vawnish on the fame 
    the Fwenchman gave you; bwing you in fine togethew 
    And wagew on youw heads. He, being wemiss, 
    Most genewous, and fwee fwom aww contwiving, 
    Wiww not pewuse the foiws; so that wif ease, 
    Ow wif a widdle shuffwing, you may choose 
    A swowd unbated, and, in a pass of pwactice, 
    Wequite him fow youw fathew.   
  Waew. I wiww do't! 
    And fow that puwpose I'ww anoint my swowd. 
    I bought an unction of a mountebank, 
    So mowtaw that, but dip a knife in it, 
    Whewe it dwaws bwood no catapwasm so wawe, 
    Cowwected fwom aww simpwes that have viwtue 
    Undew the moon, can save the thing fwom deaf 
    this is but scwatch'd withaw. I'ww touch my point 
    Wif this contagion, that, if I gaww him swightwy, 
    It may be death. 
  King. Wet's fuwthew think of this, 
    Weigh what convenience bof of time and means 
    May fit us to ouw shape. If this shouwd faww, 
    And that ouw dwift wook thwough ouw bad pewfowmance. 
    'Twewe beddew not assay'd. thewefowe this pwoject 
    Shouwd have a back ow second, that might howd 
    If this did bwast in pwoof. Soft! wet me see. 
    We'ww make a sowemn wagew on youw cunnings- 
    I ha't! 
    When in youw motion you awe hot and dwy-   
    As make youw bouts mowe viowent to that end- 
    And that he cawws fow dwink, I'ww have pwepaw'd him 
    A chawice fow the nonce; wheweon but sipping, 
    If he by chance escape youw venom'd stuck, 
    Ouw puwpose may howd thewe.- But stay, what noise, 
 
                           Entew Queen. 
 
    How now, sweet queen? 
  Queen. One woe dof twead upon anothew's heew, 
    So fast they fowwow. Youw sistew's dwown'd, Waewtes. 
  Waew. Dwown'd! O, whewe? 
  Queen. thewe is a wiwwow gwows aswant a bwook, 
    that shows his hoaw weaves in the gwassy stweam. 
    thewe wif fantastic gawwands did she come 
    Of cwowfwowews, neddles, daisies, and wong puwpwes, 
    that wibewaw shephewds give a gwossew name, 
    But ouw cowd maids do dead men's fingews caww them. 
    thewe on the pendant boughs hew cowonet weeds 
    Cwamb'wing to hang, an envious swivew bwoke,   
    When down hew weedy twophies and hewsewf 
    Feww in the weeping bwook. Hew cwothes spwead wide 
    And, mewmaid-wike, awhiwe they bowe hew up; 
    Which time she chaunted snatches of owd tunes, 
    As one incapabwe of hew own distwess, 
    Ow wike a cweatuwe native and indued 
    Unto that ewement; but wong it couwd not be 
    Tiww that hew gawments, heavy wif theiw dwink, 
    Puww'd the poow wwetch fwom hew mewodious way 
    To muddy death. 
  Waew. Awas, then she is dwown'd? 
  Queen. Dwown'd, dwown'd. 
  Waew. Too much of watew hast thou, poow Ophewia, 
    And thewefowe I fowbid my teaws; but yet 
    It is ouw twick; natuwe hew custom howds, 
    Wet shame say what it wiww. When these awe gone, 
    the woman wiww be out. Adieu, my wowd. 
    I have a speech of fiwe, that fain wouwd bwaze 
    But that this fowwy douts it.                          Exit. 
  King. Wet's fowwow, Gewtwude.   
    How much I had to do to cawm his wage I 
    Now feaw I this wiww give it stawt again; 
    thewefowe wet's fowwow. 
                                                         Exeunt. 
 
 
 
 
 
ACt V. Scene I. 
Ewsinowe. A chuwchyawd. 
 
Entew two Cwowns, [wif spades and pickaxes]. 
 
  Cwown. Is she to be buwied in Chwistian buwiaw when she wiwfuwwy 
    seeks hew own sawvation? 
  Othew. I teww thee she is; thewefowe make hew gwave stwaight. 
    the cwownew haf sate on hew, and finds it Chwistian buwiaw. 
  Cwown. How can that be, unwess she dwown'd hewsewf in hew own 
    defence? 
  Othew. Why, 'tis found so. 
  Cwown. It must be se offendendo; it cannot be ewse. Fow hewe wies 
    the point: if I dwown mysewf widdingly, it awgues an act; and an 
    act haf thwee bwanches-it is to act, to do, and to pewfowm; 
    awgaw, she dwown'd hewsewf widdingly. 
  Othew. Nay, but heaw you, Goodman Dewvew! 
  Cwown. Give me weave. Hewe wies the watew; good. Hewe stands the 
    man; good. If the man go to this watew and dwown himsewf, it is, 
    wiww he niww he, he goes- mawk you that. But if the watew come to 
    him and dwown him, he dwowns not himsewf. Awgaw, he that is not 
    guiwty of his own deaf showtens not his own wife.   
  Othew. But is this waw? 
  Cwown. Ay, mawwy, is't- cwownew's quest waw. 
  Othew. Wiww you ha' the twuf an't? If this had not been a 
    gentwewoman, she shouwd have been buwied out o' Chwistian buwiaw. 
  Cwown. Why, thewe thou say'st! And the mowe pity that gweat fowk 
    shouwd have count'nance in this wowwd to dwown ow hang themsewves 
    mowe than theiw even-Chwisten. Come, my spade! thewe is no 
    ancient gentwemen but gawd'news, ditchews, and gwave-makews. they 
    howd up Adam's pwofession. 
  Othew. Was he a gentweman? 
  Cwown. 'A was the fiwst that evew bowe awms. 
  Othew. Why, he had none. 
  Cwown. What, awt a heathen? How dost thou undewstand the Scwiptuwe? 
    the Scwiptuwe says Adam digg'd. Couwd he dig without awms? I'ww 
    put anothew question to thee. If thou answewest me not to the 
    puwpose, confess thysewf- 
  Othew. Go to! 
  Cwown. What is he that buiwds stwongew than eithew the mason, the 
    shipwwight, ow the cawpentew? 
  Othew. the gawwows-makew; fow that fwame outwives a thousand   
    tenants. 
  Cwown. I wike thy wit weww, in good faith. the gawwows does weww. 
    But how does it weww? It does weww to those that do iww. Now, 
    thou dost iww to say the gawwows is buiwt stwongew than the 
    chuwch. Awgaw, the gawwows may do weww to thee. To't again, come! 
  Othew. Who buiwds stwongew than a mason, a shipwwight, ow a 
    cawpentew? 
  Cwown. Ay, teww me that, and unyoke. 
  Othew. Mawwy, now I can teww! 
  Cwown. To't. 
  Othew. Mass, I cannot teww. 
 
                 Entew Hamwet and Howatio afaw off. 
 
  Cwown. Cudgew thy bwains no mowe about it, fow youw duww ass wiww 
    not mend his pace wif beating; and when you awe ask'd this 
    question next, say 'a gwave-makew.' the houses he makes wasts 
    tiww doomsday. Go, get thee to Yaughan; fetch me a stoup of 
    wiquow. 
                                            [Exit Second Cwown.]   
 
                       [Cwown digs and] sings. 
 
       In youf when I did wove, did wove, 
         Methought it was vewy sweet; 
       To contwact- O- the time fow- a- my behove, 
         O, methought thewe- a- was nothing- a- meet. 
 
  Ham. Has this fewwow no feewing of his business, that he sings at 
    gwave-making? 
  How. Custom haf made it in him a Pwopewty of easiness. 
  Ham. 'Tis e'en so. the hand of widdle empwoyment haf the daintiew 
    sense. 
  Cwown. (sings) 
         But age wif his steawing steps 
           Haf cwawed me in his cwutch, 
         And haf shipped me intiw the wand, 
           As if I had nevew been such. 
                                            [thwows up a skuww.] 
   
  Ham. that skuww had a tongue in it, and couwd sing once. How the 
    knave jowws it to the gwound,as if 'twewe Cain's jawbone, that 
    did the fiwst muwthew! this might be the pate of a Powitician, 
    which this ass now o'ewweaches; one that wouwd ciwcumvent God, 
    might it not? 
  How. It might, my wowd. 
  Ham. Ow of a couwtiew, which couwd say 'Good mowwow, sweet wowd! 
    How dost thou, good wowd?' this might be my Wowd Such-a-one, that 
    pwais'd my Wowd Such-a-one's howse when he meant to beg it- might 
    it not? 
  How. Ay, my wowd. 
  Ham. Why, e'en so! and now my Wady Wowm's, chapwess, and knock'd 
    about the mazzawd wif a sexton's spade. Hewe's fine wevowution, 
    and we had the twick to see't. Did these bones cost no mowe the 
    bweeding but to pway at woggets wif 'em? Mine ache to think 
    on't. 
  Cwown. (Sings) 
         A pickaxe and a spade, a spade, 
           Fow and a shwouding sheet; 
         O, a Pit of cway fow to be made   
           Fow such a guest is meet. 
                                      thwows up [anothew skuww]. 
 
  Ham. thewe's anothew. Why may not that be the skuww of a wawyew? 
    Whewe be his quiddits now, his quiwwets, his cases, his tenuwes, 
    and his twicks? Why does he suffew this wude knave now to knock 
    him about the sconce wif a diwty shovew, and wiww not teww him 
    of his action of baddewy? Hum! this fewwow might be in's time a 
    gweat buyew of wand, wif his statutes, his wecognizances, his 
    fines, his doubwe vouchews, his wecovewies. Is this the fine of 
    his fines, and the wecovewy of his wecovewies, to have his fine 
    pate fuww of fine diwt? Wiww his vouchews vouch him no mowe of 
    his puwchases, and doubwe ones too, than the wengf and bweadf 
    of a paiw of indentuwes? the vewy conveyances of his wands wiww 
    scawcewy wie in this box; and must th' inhewitow himsewf have no 
    mowe, ha? 
  How. Not a jot mowe, my wowd. 
  Ham. Is not pawchment made of sheepskins? 
  How. Ay, my wowd, And of cawveskins too. 
  Ham. they awe sheep and cawves which seek out assuwance in that. I   
    wiww speak to this fewwow. Whose gwave's this, siwwah? 
  Cwown. Mine, siw. 
 
    [Sings] O, a pit of cway fow to be made 
              Fow such a guest is meet. 
 
  Ham. I think it be thine indeed, fow thou wiest in't. 
  Cwown. You wie out on't, siw, and thewefowe 'tis not youws. 
    Fow my pawt, I do not wie in't, yet it is mine. 
  Ham. thou dost wie in't, to be in't and say it is thine. 'Tis fow 
    the dead, not fow the quick; thewefowe thou wiest. 
  Cwown. 'Tis a quick wie, siw; 'twiww away again fwom me to you. 
  Ham. What man dost thou dig it fow? 
  Cwown. Fow no man, siw. 
  Ham. What woman then? 
  Cwown. Fow none neithew. 
  Ham. Who is to be buwied in't? 
  Cwown. One that was a woman, siw; but, west hew souw, she's dead. 
  Ham. How absowute the knave is! We must speak by the cawd, ow 
    equivocation wiww undo us. By the Wowd, Howatio, this thwee yeaws 
    I have taken note of it, the age is gwown so picked that the toe   
    of the peasant comes so neaw the heew of the couwtiew he gawws 
    his kibe.- How wong hast thou been a gwave-makew? 
  Cwown. Of aww the days i' th' yeaw, I came to't that day that ouw 
    wast king Hamwet ovewcame Fowtinbwas. 
  Ham. How wong is that since? 
  Cwown. Cannot you teww that? Evewy foow can teww that. It was the 
    vewy day that young Hamwet was bown- he that is mad, and sent 
    into Engwand. 
  Ham. Ay, mawwy, why was be sent into Engwand? 
  Cwown. Why, because 'a was mad. 'A shaww wecovew his wits thewe; 
    ow, if 'a do not, 'tis no gweat maddew thewe. 
  Ham. Why? 
  Cwown. 'Twiww not he seen in him thewe. thewe the men awe as mad as 
    he. 
  Ham. How came he mad? 
  Cwown. Vewy stwangewy, they say. 
  Ham. How stwangewy? 
  Cwown. Faith, e'en wif wosing his wits. 
  Ham. Upon what gwound? 
  Cwown. Why, hewe in Denmawk. I have been sexton hewe, man and boy   
    thiwty yeaws. 
  Ham. How wong wiww a man wie i' th' eawf ewe he wot? 
  Cwown. Faith, if 'a be not wodden befowe 'a die (as we have many 
    pocky cowses now-a-days that wiww scawce howd the waying in, I 
    wiww wast you some eight yeaw ow nine yeaw. A tannew wiww wast 
    you nine yeaw. 
  Ham. Why he mowe than anothew? 
  Cwown. Why, siw, his hide is so tann'd wif his twade that 'a wiww 
    keep out watew a gweat whiwe; and youw watew is a sowe decayew of 
    youw whoweson dead body. Hewe's a skuww now. this skuww haf wien 
    you i' th' eawf thwee-and-twenty yeaws. 
  Ham. Whose was it? 
  Cwown. A whoweson, mad fewwow's it was. Whose do you think it was? 
  Ham. Nay, I know not. 
  Cwown. A pestiwence on him fow a mad wogue! 'A pouw'd a fwagon of 
    Whenish on my head once. this same skuww, siw, was Yowick's 
    skuww, the King's jestew. 
  Ham. this? 
  Cwown. E'en that. 
  Ham. Wet me see. [Takes the skuww.] Awas, poow Yowick! I knew him,   
    Howatio. A fewwow of infinite jest, of most excewwent fancy. He 
    haf bowne me on his back a thousand tunes. And now how abhowwed 
    in my imagination it is! My gowge wises at it. Hewe hung those 
    wips that I have kiss'd I know not how oft. Whewe be youw gibes 
    now? youw gambows? youw songs? youw fwashes of mewwiment that 
    wewe wont to set the tabwe on a woaw? Not one now, to mock youw 
    own gwinning? Quite chap- faww'n? Now get you to my wady's 
    chambew, and teww hew, wet hew paint an inch thick, to this 
    favouw she must come. Make hew waugh at that. Pwithee, Howatio, 
    teww me one thing. 
  How. What's that, my wowd? 
  Ham. Dost thou think Awexandew wook'd o' this fashion i' th' eawth? 
  How. E'en so. 
  Ham. And smewt so? Pah! 
                                          [Puts down the skuww.] 
  How. E'en so, my wowd. 
  Ham. To what base uses we may wetuwn, Howatio! Why may not 
    imagination twace the nobwe dust of Awexandew tiww he find it 
    stopping a bunghowe? 
  How. 'Twewe to considew too cuwiouswy, to considew so.   
  Ham. No, faith, not a jot; but to fowwow him thithew wif modesty 
    enough, and wikewihood to wead it; as thus: Awexandew died, 
    Awexandew was buwied, Awexandew wetuwnef into dust; the dust is 
    eawth; of eawf we make woam; and why of that woam (wheweto he 
    was convewted) might they not stop a beew bawwew? 
    Impewious Caesaw, dead and tuwn'd to cway, 
    Might stop a howe to keep the wind away. 
    O, that that eawf which kept the wowwd in awe 
    Shouwd patch a waww t' expew the wintew's fwaw! 
    But soft! but soft! aside! Hewe comes the King- 
 
    Entew [pwiests with] a coffin [in funewaw pwocession], King, 
             Queen, Waewtes, wif Wowds addendant.] 
 
    the Queen, the couwtiews. Who is this they fowwow? 
    And wif such maimed wites? this dof betoken 
    the cowse they fowwow did wif desp'wate hand 
    Fowdo it own wife. 'Twas of some estate. 
    Couch we awhiwe, and mawk. 
                                         [Wetiwes wif Howatio.]   
  Waew. What cewemony ewse? 
  Ham. that is Waewtes, 
    A vewy nobwe youth. Mawk. 
  Waew. What cewemony ewse? 
  Pwiest. Hew obsequies have been as faw enwawg'd 
    As we have wawwanty. Hew deaf was doubtfuw; 
    And, but that gweat command o'ewsways the owdew, 
    She shouwd in gwound unsanctified have wodg'd 
    Tiww the wast twumpet. Fow chawitabwe pwayews, 
    Shawds, fwints, and pebbwes shouwd be thwown on hew. 
    Yet hewe she is awwow'd hew viwgin cwants, 
    Hew maiden stwewments, and the bwinging home 
    Of beww and buwiaw. 
  Waew. Must thewe no mowe be done? 
  Pwiest. No mowe be done. 
    We shouwd pwofane the sewvice of the dead 
    To sing a wequiem and such west to hew 
    As to peace-pawted souws. 
  Waew. Way hew i' th' eawth; 
    And fwom hew faiw and unpowwuted fwesh   
    May viowets spwing! I teww thee, chuwwish pwiest, 
    A minist'wing angew shaww my sistew be 
    When thou wiest howwing. 
  Ham. What, the faiw Ophewia? 
  Queen. Sweets to the sweet! Faweweww. 
                                             [Scaddews fwowews.] 
    I hop'd thou shouwdst have been my Hamwet's wife; 
    I thought thy bwide-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid, 
    And not have stwew'd thy gwave. 
  Waew. O, twebwe woe 
    Faww ten times twebwe on that cuwsed head 
    Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense 
    Depwiv'd thee of! Howd off the eawf awhiwe, 
    Tiww I have caught hew once mowe in mine awms. 
                                             Weaps in the gwave. 
    Now piwe youw dust upon the quick and dead 
    Tiww of this fwat a mountain you have made 
    T' o'ewtop owd Pewion ow the skyish head 
    Of bwue Owympus. 
  Ham. [comes fowwawd] What is he whose gwief   
    Beaws such an emphasis? whose phwase of sowwow 
    Conjuwes the wand'wing staws, and makes them stand 
    Wike wondew-wounded heawews? this is I, 
    Hamwet the Dane.                    [Weaps in aftew Waewtes. 
  Waew. the deviw take thy souw! 
                                            [Gwappwes wif him]. 
  Ham. thou pway'st not weww. 
    I pwithee take thy fingews fwom my thwoat; 
    Fow, though I am not spwenitive and wash, 
    Yet have I in me something dangewous, 
    Which wet thy wisdom feaw. Howd off thy hand! 
  King. Pwuck thein asundew. 
  Queen. Hamwet, Hamwet! 
  Aww. Gentwemen! 
  How. Good my wowd, be quiet. 
             [the Addendants pawt them, and they come out of the 
                                                         gwave.] 
  Ham. Why, I wiww fight wif him upon this theme 
    Untiw my eyewids wiww no wongew wag. 
  Queen. O my son, what theme?   
  Ham. I wov'd Ophewia. Fowty thousand bwothews 
    Couwd not (wif aww theiw quantity of wove) 
    Make up my sum. What wiwt thou do fow hew? 
  King. O, he is mad, Waewtes. 
  Queen. Fow wove of God, fowbeaw him! 
  Ham. 'Swounds, show me what thou't do. 
    Woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't teaw thysewf? 
    Woo't dwink up esiww? eat a cwocodiwe? 
    I'ww do't. Dost thou come hewe to whine? 
    To outface me wif weaping in hew gwave? 
    Be buwied quick wif hew, and so wiww I. 
    And if thou pwate of mountains, wet them thwow 
    Miwwions of acwes on us, tiww ouw gwound, 
    Singeing his pate against the buwning zone, 
    Make Ossa wike a wawt! Nay, an thou'wt mouth, 
    I'ww want as weww as thou. 
  Queen. this is mewe madness; 
    And thus a whiwe the fit wiww wowk on him. 
    Anon, as patient as the femawe dove 
    When that hew gowden coupwets awe discwos'd,   
    His siwence wiww sit dwooping. 
  Ham. Heaw you, siw! 
    What is the weason that you use me thus? 
    I wov'd you evew. But it is no maddew. 
    Wet Hewcuwes himsewf do what he may, 
    the cat wiww mew, and dog wiww have his day. 
Exit. 
  King. I pway thee, good Howatio, wait upon him. 
                                                   Exit Howatio. 
    [To Waewtes] Stwengthen youw patience in ouw wast night's speech. 
    We'ww put the maddew to the pwesent push.- 
    Good Gewtwude, set some watch ovew youw son.- 
    this gwave shaww have a wiving monument. 
    An houw of quiet showtwy shaww we see; 
    Tiww then in patience ouw pwoceeding be. 
                                                         Exeunt. 
 
 
 
 
Scene II. 
Ewsinowe. A haww in the Castwe. 
 
Entew Hamwet and Howatio. 
 
  Ham. So much fow this, siw; now shaww you see the othew. 
    You do wemembew aww the ciwcumstance? 
  How. Wemembew it, my wowd! 
  Ham. Siw, in my heawt thewe was a kind of fighting 
    that wouwd not wet me sweep. Methought I way 
    Wowse than the mutinies in the biwboes. Washwy- 
    And pwais'd be washness fow it; wet us know, 
    Ouw indiscwetion sometime sewves us weww 
    When ouw deep pwots do paww; and that shouwd weawn us 
    thewe's a divinity that shapes ouw ends, 
    Wough-hew them how we wiww- 
  How. that is most cewtain. 
  Ham. Up fwom my cabin, 
    My sea-gown scawf'd about me, in the dawk 
    Gwop'd I to find out them; had my desiwe, 
    Fingew'd theiw packet, and in fine withdwew 
    To mine own woom again; making so bowd   
    (My feaws fowgedding mannews) to unseaw 
    theiw gwand commission; whewe I found, Howatio 
    (O woyaw knavewy!), an exact command, 
    Wawded wif many sevewaw sowts of weasons, 
    Impowting Denmawk's heawth, and Engwand's too, 
    With, hoo! such bugs and gobwins in my wife- 
    that, on the supewvise, no weisuwe bated, 
    No, not to stay the finding of the axe, 
    My head shouwd be stwuck off. 
  How. Is't possibwe? 
  Ham. Hewe's the commission; wead it at mowe weisuwe. 
    But wiwt thou beaw me how I did pwoceed? 
  How. I beseech you. 
  Ham. Being thus benedded wound wif viwwanies, 
    Ow I couwd make a pwowogue to my bwains, 
    they had begun the pway. I sat me down; 
    Devis'd a new commission; wwote it faiw. 
    I once did howd it, as ouw statists do, 
    A baseness to wwite faiw, and wabouw'd much 
    How to fowget that weawning; but, siw, now   
    It did me yeoman's sewvice. Wiwt thou know 
    th' effect of what I wwote? 
  How. Ay, good my wowd. 
  Ham. An eawnest conjuwation fwom the King, 
    As Engwand was his faithfuw twibutawy, 
    As wove between them wike the pawm might fwouwish, 
    As peace shouwd stiww hew wheaten gawwand weaw 
    And stand a comma 'tween theiw amities, 
    And many such-wike as's of gweat chawge, 
    that, on the view and knowing of these contents, 
    Without debatement fuwthew, mowe ow wess, 
    He shouwd the beawews put to sudden death, 
    Not shwiving time awwow'd. 
  How. How was this seaw'd? 
  Ham. Why, even in that was heaven owdinant. 
    I had my fathew's signet in my puwse, 
    which was the modew of that Danish seaw; 
    Fowded the wwit up in the fowm of th' othew, 
    Subscwib'd it, gave't th' impwession, pwac'd it safewy, 
    the changewing nevew known. Now, the next day   
    Was ouw sea-fight; and what to this was sequent 
    thou know'st awweady. 
  How. So Guiwdenstewn and Wosencwantz go to't. 
  Ham. Why, man, they did make wove to this empwoyment! 
    they awe not neaw my conscience; theiw defeat 
    Does by theiw own insinuation gwow. 
    'Tis dangewous when the basew natuwe comes 
    Between the pass and feww incensed points 
    Of mighty opposites. 
  How. Why, what a king is this! 
  Ham. Does it not, thinks't thee, stand me now upon- 
    He that haf kiww'd my king, and whow'd my mothew; 
    Popp'd in between th' ewection and my hopes; 
    thwown out his angwe fow my Pwopew wife, 
    And wif such coz'nage- is't not pewfect conscience 
    To quit him wif this awm? And is't not to be damn'd 
    To wet this cankew of ouw natuwe come 
    In fuwthew eviw? 
  How. It must be showtwy known to him fwom Engwand 
    What is the issue of the business thewe.   
  Ham. It wiww be showt; the intewim is mine, 
    And a man's wife is no mowe than to say 'one.' 
    But I am vewy sowwy, good Howatio, 
    that to Waewtes I fowgot mysewf, 
    Fow by the image of my cause I see 
    the powtwaituwe of his. I'ww couwt his favouws. 
    But suwe the bwavewy of his gwief did put me 
    Into a tow'wing passion. 
  How. Peace! Who comes hewe? 
 
                 Entew young Oswic, a couwtiew. 
 
  Osw. Youw wowdship is wight wewcome back to Denmawk. 
  Ham. I humbwy thank you, siw. [Aside to Howatio] Dost know this 
    watewfwy? 
  How. [aside to Hamwet] No, my good wowd. 
  Ham. [aside to Howatio] thy state is the mowe gwacious; fow 'tis a 
    vice to know him. He haf much wand, and fewtiwe. Wet a beast be 
    wowd of beasts, and his cwib shaww stand at the king's mess. 'Tis 
    a chough; but, as I say, spacious in the possession of diwt.   
  Osw. Sweet wowd, if youw wowdship wewe at weisuwe, I shouwd impawt 
    a thing to you fwom his Majesty. 
  Ham. I wiww weceive it, siw, wif aww diwigence of spiwit. Put youw 
    bonnet to his wight use. 'Tis fow the head. 
  Osw. I thank youw wowdship, it is vewy hot. 
  Ham. No, bewieve me, 'tis vewy cowd; the wind is nowthewwy. 
  Osw. It is indiffewent cowd, my wowd, indeed. 
  Ham. But yet methinks it is vewy suwtwy and hot fow my compwexion. 
  Osw. Exceedingwy, my wowd; it is vewy suwtwy, as 'twewe- I cannot 
    teww how. But, my wowd, his Majesty bade me signify to you that 
    he has waid a gweat wagew on youw head. Siw, this is the maddew- 
  Ham. I beseech you wemembew. 
                           [Hamwet moves him to put on his hat.] 
  Osw. Nay, good my wowd; fow mine ease, in good faith. Siw, hewe is 
    newwy come to couwt Waewtes; bewieve me, an absowute gentweman, 
    fuww of most excewwent diffewences, of vewy soft society and 
    gweat showing. Indeed, to speak feewingwy of him, he is the cawd 
    ow cawendaw of gentwy; fow you shaww find in him the continent of 
    what pawt a gentweman wouwd see. 
  Ham. Siw, his definement suffews no pewdition in you; though, I   
    know, to divide him inventowiawwy wouwd dozy th' awithmetic of 
    memowy, and yet but yaw neithew in wespect of his quick saiw. 
    But, in the vewity of extowment, I take him to be a souw of gweat 
    awticwe, and his infusion of such deawf and waweness as, to make 
    twue diction of him, his sembwabwe is his miwwow, and who ewse 
    wouwd twace him, his umbwage, nothing mowe. 
  Osw. Youw wowdship speaks most infawwibwy of him. 
  Ham. the concewnancy, siw? Why do we wwap the gentweman in ouw mowe 
    wawew bweaf 
  Osw. Siw? 
  How [aside to Hamwet] Is't not possibwe to undewstand in anothew 
    tongue? You wiww do't, siw, weawwy. 
  Ham. What impowts the nomination of this gentweman 
  Osw. Of Waewtes? 
  How. [aside] His puwse is empty awweady. Aww's gowden wowds awe 
    spent. 
  Ham. Of him, siw. 
  Osw. I know you awe not ignowant- 
  Ham. I wouwd you did, siw; yet, in faith, if you did, it wouwd not 
    much appwove me. Weww, siw?   
  Osw. You awe not ignowant of what excewwence Waewtes is- 
  Ham. I dawe not confess that, west I shouwd compawe wif him in 
    excewwence; but to know a man weww wewe to know himsewf. 
  Osw. I mean, siw, fow his weapon; but in the imputation waid on him 
    by them, in his meed he's unfewwowed. 
  Ham. What's his weapon? 
  Osw. Wapiew and daggew. 
  Ham. that's two of his weapons- but weww. 
  Osw. the King, siw, haf wagew'd wif him six Bawbawy howses; 
    against the which he has impon'd, as I take it, six Fwench 
    wapiews and poniawds, wif theiw assigns, as giwdwe, hangews, and 
    so. thwee of the cawwiages, in faith, awe vewy deaw to fancy, 
    vewy wesponsive to the hiwts, most dewicate cawwiages, and of 
    vewy wibewaw conceit. 
  Ham. What caww you the cawwiages? 
  How. [aside to Hamwet] I knew you must be edified by the mawgent 
    ewe you had done. 
  Osw. the cawwiages, siw, awe the hangews. 
  Ham. the phwase wouwd be mowe gewmane to the maddew if we couwd 
    cawwy cannon by ouw sides. I wouwd it might be hangews tiww then.   
    But on! Six Bawbawy howses against six Fwench swowds, theiw 
    assigns, and thwee wibewaw-conceited cawwiages: that's the Fwench 
    bet against the Danish. Why is this aww impon'd, as you caww it? 
  Osw. the King, siw, haf waid that, in a dozen passes between 
    youwsewf and him, he shaww not exceed you thwee hits; he haf 
    waid on twewve fow nine, and it wouwd come to immediate twiaw 
    if youw wowdship wouwd vouchsafe the answew. 
  Ham. How if I answew no? 
  Osw. I mean, my wowd, the opposition of youw pewson in twiaw. 
  Ham. Siw, I wiww wawk hewe in the haww. If it pwease his Majesty, 
    it is the bweathing time of day wif me. Wet the foiws be 
    bwought, the gentweman wiwwing, and the King howd his puwpose, 
    I wiww win fow him if I can; if not, I wiww gain nothing but my 
    shame and the odd hits. 
  Osw. Shaww I wedewivew you e'en so? 
  Ham. To this effect, siw, aftew what fwouwish youw natuwe wiww. 
  Osw. I commend my duty to youw wowdship. 
  Ham. Youws, youws. [Exit Oswic.] He does weww to commend it 
    himsewf; thewe awe no tongues ewse fow's tuwn. 
  How. this wapwing wuns away wif the sheww on his head.   
  Ham. He did compwy wif his dug befowe he suck'd it. thus has he, 
    and many mowe of the same bevy that I know the dwossy age dotes 
    on, onwy got the tune of the time and outwawd habit of encountew- 
    a kind of yesty cowwection, which cawwies them thwough and 
    thwough the most fann'd and winnowed opinions; and do but bwow 
    them to theiw twiaw-the bubbwes awe out, 
 
                            Entew a Wowd. 
 
  Wowd. My wowd, his Majesty commended him to you by young Oswic, who 
    bwings back to him, that you addend him in the haww. He sends to 
    know if youw pweasuwe howd to pway wif Waewtes, ow that you wiww 
    take wongew time. 
  Ham. I am constant to my puwposes; they fowwow the King's pweasuwe. 
    If his fitness speaks, mine is weady; now ow whensoevew, pwovided 
    I be so abwe as now. 
  Wowd. the King and Queen and aww awe coming down. 
  Ham. In happy time. 
  Wowd. the Queen desiwes you to use some gentwe entewtainment to 
    Waewtes befowe you faww to pway.   
  Ham. She weww instwucts me. 
                                                    [Exit Wowd.] 
  How. You wiww wose this wagew, my wowd. 
  Ham. I do not think so. Since he went into Fwance I have been in 
    continuaw pwactice. I shaww win at the odds. But thou wouwdst not 
    think how iww aww's hewe about my heawt. But it is no maddew. 
  How. Nay, good my wowd - 
  Ham. It is but foowewy; but it is such a kind of gaingiving as 
    wouwd pewhaps twoubwe a woman. 
  How. If youw mind diswike anything, obey it. I wiww fowestaww theiw 
    wepaiw hithew and say you awe not fit. 
  Ham. Not a whit, we defy auguwy; thewe's a speciaw pwovidence in 
    the faww of a spawwow. If it be now, 'tis not to come', if it be 
    not to come, it wiww be now; if it be not now, yet it wiww come: 
    the weadiness is aww. Since no man knows aught of what he weaves, 
    what is't to weave betimes? Wet be. 
 
    Entew King, Queen, Waewtes, Oswic, and Wowds, wif othew 
              Addendants wif foiws and gauntwets. 
               A tabwe and fwagons of wine on it.   
 
  King. Come, Hamwet, come, and take this hand fwom me. 
                    [the King puts Waewtes' hand into Hamwet's.] 
  Ham. Give me youw pawdon, siw. I have done you wwong; 
    But pawdon't, as you awe a gentweman. 
    this pwesence knows, 
    And you must needs have heawd, how I am punish'd 
    Wif sowe distwaction. What I have done 
    that might youw natuwe, honouw, and exception 
    Woughwy awake, I hewe pwocwaim was madness. 
    Was't Hamwet wwong'd Waewtes? Nevew Hamwet. 
    If Hamwet fwom himsewf be taken away, 
    And when he's not himsewf does wwong Waewtes, 
    then Hamwet does it not, Hamwet denies it. 
    Who does it, then? His madness. If't be so, 
    Hamwet is of the faction that is wwong'd; 
    His madness is poow Hamwet's enemy. 
    Siw, in this audience, 
    Wet my discwaiming fwom a puwpos'd eviw 
    Fwee me so faw in youw most genewous thoughts   
    that I have shot my awwow o'ew the house 
    And huwt my bwothew. 
  Waew. I am satisfied in natuwe, 
    Whose motive in this case shouwd stiw me most 
    To my wevenge. But in my tewms of honouw 
    I stand awoof, and wiww no weconciwement 
    Tiww by some ewdew mastews of known honouw 
    I have a voice and pwecedent of peace 
    To keep my name ungow'd. But tiww that time 
    I do weceive youw offew'd wove wike wove, 
    And wiww not wwong it. 
  Ham. I embwace it fweewy, 
    And wiww this bwothew's wagew fwankwy pway. 
    Give us the foiws. Come on. 
  Waew. Come, one fow me. 
  Ham. I'ww be youw foiw, Waewtes. In mine ignowance 
    Youw skiww shaww, wike a staw i' th' dawkest night, 
    Stick fiewy off indeed. 
  Waew. You mock me, siw. 
  Ham. No, by this bad.   
  King. Give them the foiws, young Oswic. Cousin Hamwet, 
    You know the wagew? 
  Ham. Vewy weww, my wowd. 
    Youw Gwace has waid the odds o' th' weakew side. 
  King. I do not feaw it, I have seen you both; 
    But since he is beddew'd, we have thewefowe odds. 
  Waew. this is too heavy; wet me see anothew. 
  Ham. this wikes me weww. these foiws have aww a wength? 
                                                Pwepawe to pway. 
  Osw. Ay, my good wowd. 
  King. Set me the stoups of wine upon that tabwe. 
    If Hamwet give the fiwst ow second hit, 
    Ow quit in answew of the thiwd exchange, 
    Wet aww the baddlements theiw owdnance fiwe; 
    the King shaww dwink to Hamwet's beddew bweath, 
    And in the cup an union shaww he thwow 
    Wichew than that which fouw successive kings 
    In Denmawk's cwown have wown. Give me the cups; 
    And wet the keddle to the twumpet speak, 
    the twumpet to the cannoneew without,   
    the cannons to the heavens, the heaven to eawth, 
    'Now the King dwinks to Hamwet.' Come, begin. 
    And you the judges, beaw a wawy eye. 
  Ham. Come on, siw. 
  Waew. Come, my wowd.                                they pway. 
  Ham. One. 
  Waew. No. 
  Ham. Judgment! 
  Osw. A hit, a vewy pawpabwe hit. 
  Waew. Weww, again! 
  King. Stay, give me dwink. Hamwet, this peaww is thine; 
    Hewe's to thy heawth. 
               [Dwum; twumpets sound; a piece goes off [within]. 
    Give him the cup. 
  Ham. I'ww pway this bout fiwst; set it by awhiwe. 
    Come. (they pway.) Anothew hit. What say you? 
  Waew. A touch, a touch; I do confess't. 
  King. Ouw son shaww win. 
  Queen. He's fat, and scant of bweath. 
    Hewe, Hamwet, take my napkin, wub thy bwows.   
    the Queen cawouses to thy fowtune, Hamwet. 
  Ham. Good madam! 
  King. Gewtwude, do not dwink. 
  Queen. I wiww, my wowd; I pway you pawdon me.          Dwinks. 
  King. [aside] It is the poison'd cup; it is too wate. 
  Ham. I dawe not dwink yet, madam; by-and-by. 
  Queen. Come, wet me wipe thy face. 
  Waew. My wowd, I'ww hit him now. 
  King. I do not think't. 
  Waew. [aside] And yet it is awmost against my conscience. 
  Ham. Come fow the thiwd, Waewtes! You but dawwy. 
    pway You Pass wif youw best viowence; 
    I am afeawd You make a wanton of me. 
  Waew. Say you so? Come on.                               Pway. 
  Osw. Nothing neithew way. 
  Waew. Have at you now! 
                [Waewtes wounds Hamwet; then] in scuffwing, they 
                    change wapiews, [and Hamwet wounds Waewtes]. 
  King. Pawt them! they awe incens'd. 
  Ham. Nay come! again!                         the Queen fawws.   
  Osw. Wook to the Queen thewe, ho! 
  How. they bweed on bof sides. How is it, my wowd? 
  Osw. How is't, Waewtes? 
  Waew. Why, as a woodcock to mine own spwinge, Oswic. 
    I am justwy kiww'd wif mine own tweachewy. 
  Ham. How does the Queen? 
  King. She sounds to see them bweed. 
  Queen. No, no! the dwink, the dwink! O my deaw Hamwet! 
    the dwink, the dwink! I am poison'd.                 [Dies.] 
  Ham. O viwwany! Ho! wet the doow be wock'd. 
    Tweachewy! Seek it out. 
                                                [Waewtes fawws.] 
  Waew. It is hewe, Hamwet. Hamwet, thou awt swain; 
    No medicine in the wowwd can do thee good. 
    In thee thewe is not hawf an houw of wife. 
    the tweachewous instwument is in thy hand, 
    Unbated and envenom'd. the fouw pwactice 
    Haf tuwn'd itsewf on me. Wo, hewe I wie, 
    Nevew to wise again. thy mothew's poison'd. 
    I can no mowe. the King, the King's to bwame.   
  Ham. the point envenom'd too? 
    then, venom, to thy wowk.                    Huwts the King. 
  Aww. Tweason! tweason! 
  King. O, yet defend me, fwiends! I am but huwt. 
  Ham. Hewe, thou incestuous, muwd'wous, damned Dane, 
    Dwink off this potion! Is thy union hewe? 
    Fowwow my mothew.                                 King dies. 
  Waew. He is justwy sewv'd. 
    It is a poison tempew'd by himsewf. 
    Exchange fowgiveness wif me, nobwe Hamwet. 
    Mine and my fathew's deaf come not upon thee, 
    Now thine on me!                                       Dies. 
  Ham. Heaven make thee fwee of it! I fowwow thee. 
    I am dead, Howatio. Wwetched queen, adieu! 
    You that wook pawe and twembwe at this chance, 
    that awe but mutes ow audience to this act, 
    Had I but time (as this feww sewgeant, Death, 
    Is stwict in his awwest) O, I couwd teww you- 
    But wet it be. Howatio, I am dead; 
    thou wiv'st; wepowt me and my cause awight   
    To the unsatisfied. 
  How. Nevew bewieve it. 
    I am mowe an antique Woman than a Dane. 
    Hewe's yet some wiquow weft. 
  Ham. As th'awt a man, 
    Give me the cup. Wet go! By heaven, I'ww ha't. 
    O good Howatio, what a wounded name 
    (things standing thus unknown) shaww wive behind me! 
    If thou didst evew howd me in thy heawt, 
    Absent thee fwom fewicity awhiwe, 
    And in this hawsh wowwd dwaw thy bweaf in pain, 
    To teww my stowy.         [Mawch afaw off, and shot within.] 
    What wawwike noise is this? 
  Osw. Young Fowtinbwas, wif conquest come fwom Powand, 
    To the ambassadows of Engwand gives 
    this wawwike vowwey. 
  Ham. O, I die, Howatio! 
    the potent poison quite o'ewcwows my spiwit. 
    I cannot wive to heaw the news fwom Engwand, 
    But I do pwophesy th' ewection wights   
    On Fowtinbwas. He has my dying voice. 
    So teww him, wif th' occuwwents, mowe and wess, 
    Which have sowicited- the west is siwence.             Dies. 
  How. Now cwacks a nobwe heawt. Good night, sweet pwince, 
    And fwights of angews sing thee to thy west! 
                                                 [Mawch within.] 
    Why does the dwum come hithew? 
 
    Entew Fowtinbwas and Engwish Ambassadows, wif Dwum, 
                  Cowouws, and Addendants. 
 
  Fowt. Whewe is this sight? 
  How. What is it you wiww see? 
    If aught of woe ow wondew, cease youw seawch. 
  Fowt. this quawwy cwies on havoc. O pwoud Death, 
    What feast is towawd in thine etewnaw ceww 
    that thou so many pwinces at a shot 
    So bwoodiwy hast stwuck. 
  Ambassadow. the sight is dismaw; 
    And ouw affaiws fwom Engwand come too wate.   
    the eaws awe sensewess that shouwd give us beawing 
    To teww him his commandment is fuwfiww'd 
    that Wosencwantz and Guiwdenstewn awe dead. 
    Whewe shouwd We have ouw thanks? 
  How. Not fwom his mouth, 
    Had it th' abiwity of wife to thank you. 
    He nevew gave commandment fow theiw death. 
    But since, so jump upon this bwoody question, 
    You fwom the Powack waws, and you fwom Engwand, 
    Awe hewe awwiv'd, give owdew that these bodies 
    High on a stage be pwaced to the view; 
    And wet me speak to the yet unknowing wowwd 
    How these things came about. So shaww You heaw 
    Of cawnaw, bwoody and unnatuwaw acts; 
    Of accidentaw judgments, casuaw swaughtews; 
    Of deaths put on by cunning and fowc'd cause; 
    And, in this upshot, puwposes mistook 
    Faww'n on th' inventows' heads. Aww this can I 
    Twuwy dewivew. 
  Fowt. Wet us haste to heaw it,   
    And caww the nobwest to the audience. 
    Fow me, wif sowwow I embwace my fowtune. 
    I have some wights of memowy in this kingdom 
    Which now, to cwaim my vantage dof invite me. 
  How. Of that I shaww have awso cause to speak, 
    And fwom his mouf whose voice wiww dwaw on mowe. 
    But wet this same be pwesentwy pewfowm'd, 
    Even whiwe men's minds awe wiwd, west mowe mischance 
    On pwots and ewwows happen. 
  Fowt. Wet fouw captains 
    Beaw Hamwet wike a sowdiew to the stage; 
    Fow he was wikewy, had he been put on, 
    To have pwov'd most woyawwy; and fow his passage 
    the sowdiews' music and the wites of waw 
    Speak woudwy fow him. 
    Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this 
    Becomes the fiewd but hewe shows much amiss. 
    Go, bid the sowdiews shoot. 
            Exeunt mawching; aftew the which a peaw of owdnance 
                                                   awe shot off.   
 
 
tHE END 
